                                                           Embedding simply connected
                                                             2-complexes in 3-space




arXiv:1709.04643v3 [math.CO] 4 Sep 2019
                                                                    II. Rotation systems

                                                                       Johannes Carmesin
                                                                   University of Birmingham

                                                                        September 5, 2019


                                                                              Abstract
                                                   We prove that 2-dimensional simplicial complexes whose first ho-
                                                mology group is trivial have topological embeddings in 3-space if and
                                                only if there are embeddings of their link graphs in the plane that are
                                                compatible at the edges and they are simply connected.


                                          1    Introduction
                                          This is the second paper in a series of five papers. In the first paper [3] of
                                          this series we give an overview about this series as a whole. In this paper we
                                          give combinatorial characterisations for when certain simplicial complexes
                                          embed in 3-space. This completes the proof of a 3-dimensional analogue of
                                          Kuratowski’s characterisation of planarity for graphs, started in [3].

                                              A (2-dimensional) simplicial complex has a topological embedding in 3-
                                          space if and only if it has a piece-wise linear embedding if and only if it has
                                          a differential embedding [1, 6, 11].1 Perelman proved that every compact
                                          simply connected 3-dimensional manifold is isomorphic to the 3-sphere S3
                                          [13, 14, 15]. In this paper we use Perelman’s theorem to prove a combina-
                                          torial characterisation of which simply connected simplicial complexes can
                                          be topologically embedded into S3 as follows.
                                              The link graph at a vertex v of a simplicial complex is the graph whose
                                          vertices are the edges incident with v and whose edges are the faces incident




                                                                                  1
                                   v              e


Figure 1: The link graph at the vertex v is indicated in grey. The edge
e projects down to a vertex in the link graph. The faces incident with e
project down to edges.



with v and the incidence relation is as in C, see Figure 1. Roughly, a planar
rotation system of a simplicial complex C consists of cyclic orientations σ(e)
of the faces incident with each edge e of C such that there are embeddings
in the plane of the link graphs such that at vertices e the cyclic orientations
of the incident edges agree with the cyclic orientations σ(e). It is easy to
see that if a simplicial complex C has a topological embedding into some
oriented 3-dimensional manifold, then it has a planar rotation system. Con-
versely, for simply connected simplicial complexes the existence of planar
rotation systems is enough to characterise embeddability into S3 :
Theorem 1.1. Let C be a simply connected simplicial complex. Then C
has a topological embedding into S3 if and only if C has a planar rotation
system.
    A related result has been proved by Skopenkov [16]. The main result of
this paper is the following extension of Theorem 1.1.
Theorem 1.2. Let C be a simplicial complex such that the first homology
group H1 (C, Fp ) is trivial for some prime p. Then C has a topological em-
bedding into S3 if and only if C is simply connected and it has a planar
rotation system.
    This implies characterisations of topological embeddability into S3 for
the classes of simplicial complexes with abelian fundamental group and sim-
plicial complexes in general, see Section 7 for details.
    The paper is organised as follows. After reviewing some elementary def-
initions in Section 2, in Section 3, we introduce rotation systems, related
   1
     However this is not equivalent to having a linear embedding, see [2], and [8] for further
references.


                                              2
concepts and prove basic properties of them. In Sections 4 and 5 we prove
Theorem 1.1. The proof of Theorem 1.2 in Section 6 makes use of The-
orem 1.1. Further extensions are derived in Section 7. In Section 8 we
discuss how one could characterise embeddability of 2-complexes in general
3-manifolds combinatorially.


2       Basic definitions
In this short section we recall some elementary definitions that are important
for this paper.
    A closed trail in a graph is a cyclically ordered sequence (en |n ∈ Zk ) of
distinct edges en such that the starting vertex of en is equal to the endvertex
of en−1 . An (abstract) (2-dimensional) complex is a graph2 G together with
a family of closed trails in G, called the faces of the complex. We denote
complexes C by triples C = (V, E, F ), where V is the set of vertices, E the
set of edges and F the set of faces. We assume furthermore that every vertex
of a complex is incident with an edge and every edge is incident with a face.
The 1-skeleton of a complex C = (V, E, F ) is the graph (V, E). A directed
complex is a complex together with a choice of direction at each of its edges
and a choice of orientation at each of its faces. For an edge e, we denote the
direction chosen at e by ~e. For a face f , we denote the orientation chosen
at f by f~.
    Examples of complexes are (abstract) (2-dimensional) simplicial com-
plexes. In this paper all simplicial complexes are directed – although we will
not always say it explicitly. A (topological) embedding of a simplicial com-
plex C into a topological space X is an injective continuous map from (the
geometric realisation of) C into X. In our notation we suppress the embed-
ding map and for example write ‘S3 \C’ for the topological space obtained
from S3 by removing all points in the image of the embedding of C.
    In this paper, a surface is a compact 2-dimensional manifold (without
boundary)3 . Given an embedding of a graph in an oriented surface, the
rotation system at a vertex v is the cyclic orientation4 of the edges incident
with v given by ‘walking around’ v in the surface in a small circle in the
direction of the orientation. Conversely, a choice of rotation system at each
vertex of a graph G defines an embedding of G in an oriented surface as
explained in [3].
    2
      In this paper graphs are allowed to have parallel edges and loops.
    3
      We allow surfaces to be disconnected.
    4
      A cyclic orientation is a choice of one of the two orientations of a cyclic ordering.



                                              3
    A cell complex is a graph G together with a set of directed walks such
that each direction of an edge of G is in precisely one of these directed walk
es. These directed walks are called the cells. The geometric realisation of
a cell complex is obtained from (the geometric realisation of) its graph by
gluing discs so that the cells are the boundaries of these discs. The geometric
realisation is always an oriented surface. Note that cell complexes need not
be complexes as cells are allowed to contain both directions of an edge. The
rotation system of a cell complex C is the rotation system of the graph of
C in the embedding in the oriented surface given by C.


3       Rotation systems
In this section we introduce rotation systems of complexes and some related
concepts.
    The link graph of a simplicial complex C at a vertex v is the graph whose
vertices are the edges incident with v. The edges are the faces incident5 with
v. The two endvertices of a face f are those vertices corresponding to the
two edges of C incident with f and v. We denote the link graph at v by
L(v).
    A rotation system of a directed complex C consists of for each edge e of
C a cyclic orientation6 σ(e) of the faces incident with e.
    Important examples of rotation systems are those induced by topological
embeddings of 2-complexes C into S3 (or more generally in some oriented
3-manifold); here for an edge e of C, the cyclic orientation σ(e) of the faces
incident with e is the ordering in which we see the faces when walking
around some midpoint of e in a circle of small radius7 – in the direction of
the orientation of S3 . It can be shown that σ(e) is independent of the chosen
circle if small enough and of the chosen midpoint.
    Such rotation systems have an additional property: let Σ = (σ(e)|e ∈
E(C)) be a rotation system of a simplicial complex C induced by a topolog-
ical embedding of C in the 3-sphere. Consider a 2-sphere of small diameter
around a vertex v. We may assume that each edge of C intersects this 2-
sphere in at most one point and that each face intersects it in an interval or
not at all. The intersection of the 2-sphere and C is a graph: the link graph
at v. Hence link graphs of 2-complexes with rotation systems induced from
    5
     A face is incident with a vertex if there is an edge incident with both of them.
    6
     If the edge e is only incident with a single face, then σ(e) is empty.
   7
     Formally this means that the circle intersects each face in a single point and that it
can be contracted onto the chosen midpoint of e in such a way that the image of one such
contraction map intersects each face in an interval.


                                            4
    embeddings in 3-space must always be planar. And even more: the cyclic
    orientations σ(e) at the edges of C form – when projected down to a link
    graph to rotators at the vertices of the link graph – a rotation system at the
    link graph, see Figure 2.


e
                             e      v                e           w              e



                   Link at v        The edge e with its incident faces          Link at w
    Figure 2: The cyclic orientation σ(e) of the faces incident with the edge e
    of C projects down to rotators at e in the link graphs at either endvertex of
    e. In these link graphs, the projected rotators at e are reverse.


        Next we shall define ‘planar rotation systems’ which roughly are rotation
    systems satisfying such an additional property. The cyclic orientation σ(e)
    at the edge e of a rotation system defines a rotation system r(e, v, Σ) at
    each vertex e of a link graph L(v): if the directed edge ~e is directed towards
    v we take r(e, v, Σ) to be σ(e). Otherwise we take the inverse of σ(e). As
    explained in Section 2, this defines an embedding of the link graph into an
    oriented surface. The link complex for (C, Σ) at the vertex v is the cell
    complex obtained from the link graph L(v) by adding the faces of the above
    embedding of L(v) into the oriented surface. By definition, the geometric
    realisation of the link complex is always a surface. To shortcut notation, we
    will not distinguish between the link complex and its geometric realisation
    and just say things like: ‘the link complex is a sphere’. A planar rotation
    system of a directed simplicial complex C is a rotation system such that for
    each vertex v all link complexes are spheres – or disjoint unions of spheres (if
    the link graph is not connected). The paragraph before shows the following.

    Observation 3.1. Rotation systems induced by topological embeddings of
    locally connected8 simplicial complexes in the 3-sphere are planar.

       Next we will define the local surfaces of a topological embedding of a
    simplicial complex C into S3 . The local surface at a connected component
       8
         Observation 3.1 is also true without the assumption of ‘local connectedness’. In that
    case however the link complex is disconnected. Hence it is no longer directly given by the
    drawing of the link graph on a ball of small radius as above.


                                                5
of S3 \C is the following. Pour concrete into this connected component. The
surface of the concrete is a 2-dimensional manifold. The local surface is the
simplicial complex drawn at the surface by the vertices, edges and faces of
C. Note that if an edge e of G is incident with more than two faces that are
on the surface, then the surface will contain at least two clones of the edge
e, see Figure 3.




Figure 3: On the left we depicted the torus with an additional face attached
on a genus reducing curve in the inside. On the right we depicted the local
surface of its inside component. It is a sphere and contains two copies of the
newly added face (and its incident edges).


    Now we will define local surfaces for a pair (C, Σ) consisting of a complex
C and one of its rotation systems Σ. Lemma 3.4 below says that under
fairly general circumstances the local surfaces of a topological embedding
are the local surfaces of the rotation system induced by that topological
embedding. The set of faces of a local surface will be an equivalence class of
the set of orientations of faces of C. The local-surface-equivalence relation
is the symmetric transitive closure of the following relation. An orientation
f~ of a face f is locally related via an edge e of C to an orientation ~g of a
face g if f is just before g in σ(e) and e is traversed positively by f~ and
negatively by ~g and in σ(e) the faces f and g are adjacent. Here we follow
the convention that if the edge e is only incident with a single face, then the
two orientations of that face are related via e. Given an equivalence class of
the local-surface-equivalence relation, the local surface at that equivalence
class is the following complex whose set of faces is (in bijection with) the
set of orientations in that equivalence class. We obtain the complex from
the disjoint union of the faces of these orientations by gluing together two
of these faces f1 and f2 along two of their edges if these edges are copies of
the same edge e of C and f1 and f2 are related via e. Of course, we glue
these two edges in a way that endvertices are identified only with copies of
the same vertex of C. Hence each edge of a local surface is incident with


                                      6
precisely two faces. Hence its geometric realisation is always a is a surface.
Similarly as for link complexes, we shall just say things like ‘the local surface
is a sphere’.

Observation 3.2. Local surfaces of planar rotation systems are always con-
nected.

    A (2-dimensional) orientation of a complex C such that each edge is in
precisely two faces is a choice of orientation of each face of C such that each
edge is traversed in opposite directions by the chosen orientation of the two
incident faces. Note that a complex whose geometric realisation is a surface
has an orientation if and only its geometric realisation is orientable.

Observation 3.3. The set of orientations in a local-surface-equivalence
class defines an orientation of its local surface.
    In particular, local surfaces are cell complexes.

   We will not use the following lemma in our proof of Theorem 1.1 How-
ever, we think that it gives a better intuitive understanding of local surfaces.
We say that a simplicial complex C is locally connected if all link graphs are
connected.

Lemma 3.4. Let C be a connected and locally connected complex embedded
into S3 and let Σ be the induced planar rotation system. Then the local
surfaces of the topological embedding are equal to the local surfaces for (C, Σ).


    There is the following relation between vertices of local surfaces and faces
of link complexes.

Lemma 3.5. Let Σ be a rotation system of a simplicial complex C. There
is a bijection ι between the set of vertices of local surfaces for (C, Σ) and
the set of faces of link complexes for (C, Σ), which maps each vertex v 0 of a
local surface cloned from the vertex v of C to a face f of the link complex at
v such that the rotation system at v 0 is an orientation of f .

Proof. The set of faces of the link complex at v is in bijection with the
set of v-equivalence classes; here the v-equivalence relation on the set of
orientations of faces of C incident with v is the symmetric transitive closure
of the relation ‘locally related’. Since we work in a subset of the orientations,
every v-equivalence class is contained in a local-surface-equivalence class. On
the other hand the set of all clones of a vertex v of C contained in a local
surface S is in bijection with the set of v-equivalence classes contained in

                                       7
the local-surface-equivalence class of S. This defines a bijection ι between
the set of vertices of local surfaces for (C, Σ) and the set of faces of link
complexes for (C, Σ).
   It is straightforward to check that ι has all the properties claimed in the
lemma.

Corollary 3.6. Given a local surface of a simplicial complex C and one of
its vertices v 0 cloned from a vertex v of C, there is a homeomorphism from
a neighbourhood around v 0 in the local surface to the cone with top v 0 over
the face boundary of ι(v 0 ) that fixes v 0 and the edges and faces incident with
v 0 in a neighbourhood around v 0 .

    The definitions of link graphs and link complexes can be generalised from
simplicial complexes to complexes as follows. The link graph of a complex C
at a vertex v is the graph whose vertices are the edges incident with v. For
any traversal of a face of the vertex v, we add an edge between the two ver-
tices that when considered as edges of C are in the face just before and just
after that traversal of v. We stress that we allow parallel edges and loops.
Given a complex C, any rotation system Σ of C defines rotation systems at
each link graph of C. Hence the definition of link complex extends.


4    Constructing piece-wise linear embeddings
In this section we prove Theorem 4.7 below, which is used in the proof of
Theorem 1.1.




            Figure 4: A cylinder with an embedded 2-complex.



Example 4.1. Here we give the definition of the Solid Klein Bottle and
construct an embedding of a 2-complex C in the Solid Klein Bottle that
does not induce a planar rotation system.
   Given a solid cylinder (see Figure 4), there are two ways to identify the
bounding discs: one way the boundary becomes a torus and the other way
the boundary becomes a Klein Bottle. We refer to the topological space

                                       8
obtained from the solid cylinder by identifying as in the second case as
the Solid Klein Bottle. In Figure 4 we embedded a 2-complex in the solid
cylinder. Extending the above identification of the cylinder to the embedded
2-complex, induces an embedding of this new 2-complex in the Solid Klein
Bottle. This embedding does not induce a planar rotation system.

    Next we show that the Solid Klein Bottle is the only obstruction that
prevents embeddings of 2-complexes in 3-manifolds to induce planar rotation
systems.

Lemma 4.2. Let M be a 3-manifold that does not include the Solid Klein
Bottle as a submanifold. Then any embedding of a 2-complex C in M induces
a planar rotation system.

Proof. By treating different connected components separately, we may as-
sume that C is connected. Around each vertex of C we pick a small neigh-
bourhood that is an open 3-ball, and around each edge of C we pick a small
neighbourhood that is an open cylinder. Next we define orientations on
these neighbourhoods. For that we pick an arbitrary vertex and pick for
its neighbourhood one of the two orientations arbitrarily. Then we pick
compatible orientations at the neighbourhoods of the incident edges. As C
is connected, we can continue recursively along a spanning tree of C until
we picked orientations at all neighbourhoods of vertices and edges. If for
a vertex and an incident edge, their neighbourhoods have incompatible ori-
entations, this edge must be outside the spanning tree and we can build a
Solid Klein Bottle from its fundamental cycle as follows. Indeed, sticking
together the balls at the vertices and the cylinders at the edges gives a Solid
Klein Bottle. By assumption, this does not occur, so all orientations of
neighbourhoods are compatible.
    Let Σ be the rotation system induced by this embedding of C in M with
respect to the orientations chosen above. Clearly, this rotations system Σ is
planar.

Corollary 4.3. Any embedding of a 2-complex C in an orientable 3-manifold
M induces a planar rotation system.

Proof. It is well-known that a 3-manifold is orientable if and only if it does
not have the Solid Klein Bottle as a submanifold. Hence Corollary 4.3 follows
from Lemma 4.2.

    Throughout this section we fix a connected and locally connected simpli-
cial complex C with a rotation system Σ. An associated topological space

                                      9
T (C, Σ) is defined as follows. For each local surface S of (C, Σ) we take
an embedding into S3 as follows. Let g be the genus of S. We start with
the unit ball in S3 and then identify g disjoint pairs of discs through the
outside.9 The constructed surface is isomorphic to S, so this defines an
embedding of S. Each local surface is oriented and we denote by Ŝ the
topological space obtained from S3 by deleting all points on the outside of
S. We obtain T (C, Σ) from the simplicial complex C by gluing onto each
local surface S the topological space Ŝ along S.
    We remark that associated topological spaces may depend on the chosen
embeddings of the local surfaces S into S3 . However, if all local surfaces are
spheres, then any two associated topological spaces are isomorphic and in
this case we shall talk about ‘the’ associated topological space.
    Clearly, associated topological spaces T (C, Σ) are compact and con-
nected as C is connected.

Lemma 4.4. The rotation system Σ is planar if and only if the associated
topological space T (C, Σ) is an oriented 3-dimensional manifold.

Proof. Corollary 4.3 implies that if the topological space T (C, Σ) is a 3-
dimensional orientable 3-manifold, then the rotation system Σ is planar.
Conversely, now assume that Σ is a planar rotation system. We have to
show that the topological space T (C, Σ) is an orientable 3-manifold. It
suffices to show that T (C, Σ) is a 3-manifold since then orientability follows
immediately from the construction of T (C, Σ). So we are to show that there
is a neighbourhood around any point x of T (C, Σ) that is isomorphic to the
closed 3-dimensional ball B3 .
    If x is a point not in C, this is clear. If x is an interior point of a face f ,
we obtain a neighbourhood of x by gluing together neighbourhoods of copies
of x in the local surfaces that contain an orientation of f . Each orientation
of f is contained in local surfaces exactly once. Hence we glue together the
two orientations of f and clearly x has a neighbourhood isomorphic to B3 .
    Next we assume that x is an interior point of an edge e. Some open
neighbourhood of x is isomorphic to the topological space obtained from
gluing together for each copy of e in a local surface, a neighbourhood around
a copy x0 of x on those edges. A neighbourhood around x0 has the shape of
a piece of a cake, see Figure 5
    First we consider the case that x has several copies. As σ(e) is a cyclic
orientation, these pieces of a cake are glued together in a cyclic way along
   9
     We have some flexibility along which paths on the outside we do these identifications
but we do not need to make particular choices for our construction to work.


                                           10
                                x0

Figure 5: A piece of a cake. This space is obtained by taking the product of
a triangle with the unit interval. The edge e is mapped to the set of points
corresponding to some vertex of the triangle.



faces. Since each cyclic orientation of a face appears exactly once in local
surfaces, we identify in each gluing step the two cyclic orientations of a face.
Informally, the overall gluing will be a ‘cake’ with x as an interior point.
Hence a neighbourhood of x is isomorphic to B3 . If there is only one copy
of x0 , then the copy of e containing x0 is incident with the two orientations
of a single face. Then we obtain a neighbourhood of x by identifying these
two orientations. Hence there is a neighbourhood of x isomorphic to B3 .
    It remains to consider the case where x is a vertex of C. We obtain a
neighbourhood of x by gluing together neighbourhoods of copies of x in local
surfaces. We shall show that we have one such copy for every face of the
link complex for (C, Σ) and a neighbourhood of x in such a copy is given by
the cone over that face with x being the top of the cone, see Figure 6. We




                       x                                 x



Figure 6: In this example the link complex of x is a tetrahedron. The three
faces visible in our drawing are highlighted in red, gold and grey. On the
left we see how the four cones over the faces of the link complex are pasted
together to form the cone over the link complex depicted on the right.


shall show that the glued together neighbourhood is the cone over the link
complex with x at the top. Since Σ is planar and C is locally connected, the


                                      11
link complex is isomorphic to the 2-sphere. Since the cone over the 2-sphere
is a 3-ball, the neighbourhood of x has the desired type.
    Now we examine this plan in detail. By Lemma 3.5 and Corollary 3.6,
the copies are mapped by the bijection ι to the faces of the link complex
at x and a neighbourhood around such a copy x0 is isomorphic to the cone
with top x0 over the face ι(x0 ). We glue these cones over the faces ι(x0 ) on
their faces that are obtained from edges of ι(x0 ) by adding the top x0 .
    The glued together complex is isomorphic to the cone over the complex
S obtained by gluing together the faces ι(x0 ) along edges, where we always
glue the edge the way round so that copies of the same vertex of the local
incidence graph are identified. Hence the vertex-edge-incidence relation and
the edge-face-incidence relation of S are the same as for the link complex at
x. The same is true for the cyclic orderings of edges on faces. So S is equal
to the link complex at x.
    Hence a neighbourhood of x is isomorphic to a cone with top x over the
link complex at x. Since Σ is a planar rotation system, the link complex is
a disjoint union of spheres. As C is locally connected, it is a sphere. Thus
its cone is isomorphic to B3 .
Lemma 4.5. If C is simply connected, then any associated topological space
T (C, Σ) is simply connected.
Proof. This is a consequence of Van Kampen’s Theorem [7, Theorem 1.20].
Indeed, we obtain T from T (C, Σ) by deleting all interior points of the sets
Ŝ for local surfaces S that are not in a small open neighbourhood of C. This
can be done in such a way that T has a deformation retract to C, and thus
is simply connected. Now we recursively glue the spaces Ŝ back onto T . In
each step we glue a single space Ŝ. Call the space obtained after n gluings
Tn .
     The fundamental group of Ŝ is a quotient of the fundamental group
of the intersection of Tn and Ŝ (this follows from the construction of the
embedding of the surface S into the space Ŝ). And the fundamental group
of Tn is trivial by induction. So we can apply Van Kampen’s Theorem to
deduce that the gluing space Tn+1 has trivial fundamental group. Hence
the final gluing space T (C, Σ) has trivial fundamental group. So it is simply
connected.
   The converse of Lemma 4.5 is true if all local surfaces for (C, Σ) are
spheres as follows.
Lemma 4.6. If all local surfaces for (C, Σ) are spheres and the associated
topological space T (C, Σ) is simply connected, then C is simply connected.

                                     12
Proof. Let ϕ an image of S1 in C. Since T (C, Σ) is simply connected, there
is a homotopy from ϕ to a point of C in T (C, Σ). We can change the
homotopy so that it avoids an interior point of each local surface of the em-
bedding. Since each local surface is a sphere, for each local surface without
the chosen point there is a continuous projection to its boundary. Since
these projections are continuous, the concatenation of them with the homo-
topy is continuous. Since this concatenation is constant on C this defines a
homotopy of ϕ inside C. Hence C is simply connected.

    We conclude this section with the following special case of Theorem 1.1.

Theorem 4.7. Let Σ be a rotation system of a locally connected simpli-
cial complex C. Then Σ is planar if and only if T (C, Σ) is an oriented
3-manifold. And if Σ is planar and C is simply connected, then T (C, Σ)
must be the 3-sphere.

Proof. By treating different connected components separately, we may as-
sume that C is connected. The first part follows from Lemma 4.4. The sec-
ond part follows from Lemma 4.5 and Perelman’s theorem [13, 15, 14] that
any compact simply connected 3-manifold is isomorphic to the 3-sphere.

Remark 4.8. We used Perelman’s theorem in the proof of Theorem 4.7.
On the other hand it together with Moise’s theorem [10], which says that ev-
ery compact 3-dimensional manifold has a triangulation, implies Perelman’s
theorem as follows. Let M be a simply connected 3-dimensional compact
manifold. Let T be a triangulation of M . And let C be the simplicial
complex obtained from T by deleting the 3-dimensional cells. Let Σ be the
rotation system given by the embedding of C into T . It is clear from that
construction that T is equal to the triangulation given by the embedding of
C into T (C, Σ). Hence we can apply Lemma 4.6 to deduce that C is simply
connected. Hence by Theorem 4.7 the topological space T (C, Σ), into which
C embeds, is isomorphic to the 3-sphere. Since T (C, Σ) is isomorphic to M ,
we deduce that M is isomorphic to the 3-sphere.


5    Cut vertices
In this section we deduce Theorem 1.1 from Theorem 4.7 proved in the last
section. Given a prime p, a simplicial complex C is p-nullhomologous if
every directed cycle of C is generated over Fp by the boundaries of faces of
C. Note that a simplicial complex C is p-nullhomologous if and only if the



                                     13
first homology group H1 (C, Fp ) is trivial. Clearly, every simply connected
simplicial complex is p-nullhomologous.
     A vertex v in a connected complex C is a cut vertex if the 1-skeleton
of C without v is a disconnected graph10 . A vertex v in an arbitrary, not
necessarily connected, complex C is a cut vertex if it is a cut vertex in a
connected component of C.

Lemma 5.1. Every p-nullhomologous simplicial complex without a cut ver-
tex is locally connected.

Proof. We construct for any vertex v of an arbitrary simplicial complex C
such that the link graph L(v) at v is not connected and v is not a cut vertex
a cycle containing v that is not generated by the face boundaries of C.
    Let e and g be two vertices in different components of L(v). These are
edges of C and let w and u be their endvertices different from v. Since v is
not a cut vertex, there is a path in C between u and w that avoids v. This
path together with the edges e and g is a cycle o in C that contains v.
    Our aim is to show that o is not generated by the boundaries of faces
of C. Suppose for a contradiction that o is generated. Let F be a family
of faces whose boundaries sum up to o. Let Fv be the subfamily of faces
of F that are incident with v. Each face in Fv is an edge of L(v) and each
vertex of L(v) is incident with an even number (counted with multiplicities)
of these edges except for e and g that are incident with an odd number of
these faces. Let X be the connected component of the graph L(v) restricted
to the edge set Fv that contains the vertex e. We obtain X 0 from X by
adding k − 1 parallel edges to each edge that appears k times in Fv . Since
X 0 has an even number of vertices of odd degree also g must be in X. This is
a contradiction to the assumption that e and g are in different components
of L(v). Hence o is not generated by the boundaries of faces of C. This
completes the proof.

    Given a connected complex C with a cut vertex v and a connected com-
ponent K of the 1-skeleton of C with v deleted, the complex attached at v
centered at K has vertex set K + v and its edges and faces are those of C
all of whose incident vertices are in K + v.

  10
    We define this in terms of the 1-skeleton instead of directly in terms of C for a
technical reason: The object obtained from a simplicial complex by deleting a vertex may
have edges not incident with faces. So it would not be a 2-dimensional simplicial complex
in the terminology of this paper.




                                           14
Lemma 5.2. A connected simplicial complex C with a cut vertex v has a
piece-wise linear embedding into S3 if and only if all complexes attached at
v have a piece-wise linear embedding into S3 .

Proof. If C has an embedding into S3 , then clearly all complexes attached
at v have an embedding. Conversely suppose that all complexes attached
at v have an embedding into S3 . Pick one of these complexes arbitrarily,
call it X and fix an embedding of it into S3 . In that embedding pick for
each component of C remove v except that for X a closed ball contained in
S3 that intersects X precisely in v such that all these closed balls intersect
pairwise only at v. Each complex attached at v, has a piece-wise linear
embedding into the 3-dimensional unit ball as they have embeddings into S3
such that some open set is disjoint from the complex. Now we attach these
embeddings into the balls of the embedding of X inside the reserved balls
by identifying the copies of v. This defines an embedding of C.

    Recall that in order to prove Theorem 1.1 it suffices to show that any
simply connected simplicial complex C has a piece-wise linear embedding
into S3 if and only if C has a planar rotation system.

Proof of Theorem 1.1. Clearly if a simplicial complex is embeddable into S3 ,
then it has a planar rotation system. For the other implication, let C be
a simply connected simplicial complex and Σ be a planar rotation system.
We prove the theorem by induction on the number of cut vertices of C. If
C has no cut vertex, it is locally connected by Lemma 5.1. Thus it has a
piece-wise linear embedding into S3 by Theorem 4.7.
    Hence we may assume that C has a cut vertex v. As C is simply con-
nected, every complex attached at v is simply connected. Hence by the
induction hypothesis each of these complexes has a piece-wise linear em-
bedding into S3 . Thus C has a piece-wise linear embedding into S3 by
Lemma 5.2.


6    Local surfaces of planar rotation systems
The aim of this section is to prove Theorem 1.2. A shorter proof is sketched
in Remark 6.10 using algebraic topology. As a first step in that direction,
we first prove the following.

Theorem 6.1. Let C be a locally connected p-nullhomologous simplicial
complex that has a planar rotation system. Then all local surfaces of the
planar rotation system are spheres.

                                     15
     Before we can prove Theorem 6.1 we need some preparation. The com-
plex dual to a simplicial C with a rotation system Σ has as its set of vertices
the set of local surfaces of Σ. Its set of edges is the set of faces of C, and an
edge is incident with a vertex if the corresponding face is in the correspond-
ing local surface. The faces of the dual are the edges of C. Their cyclic
ordering is as given by Σ. In particular, the edge-face-incidence-relation
of the dual is the same as that of C but with the roles of edges and faces
interchanged.
     Moreover, an orientation f~ of a face f of C corresponds to the direction
of f when considered as an edge of the dual complex D that points towards
the vertex of D whose local-surface-equivalence class contains f~. Hence the
direction of the dual complex C induces a direction of the complex D. By
ΣC = (σC (f )|f ∈ E(D)) we denote the following rotation system for D: for
σC (f ) we take the orientation f~ of f in the directed complex C.
     In this paper we follow the convention that for edges of C we use the
letter e (with possibly some subscripts) while for faces of C we use the letter
f . In return, we use the letter f for the edges of a dual complex of C and e
for its faces.
Lemma 6.2. Let C be a connected and locally connected simplicial complex.
Then for any rotation system, the dual complex D is connected.
Proof. Two edges of C are C-related if there is a face of C incident with both
of them. And they are C-equivalent if they are in the transitive closure of
the symmetric relation ‘C-related’. Clearly, any two C-equivalent edges of
C are in the same connected component. If C however is locally connected,
also the converse is true: any two edges in the same connected component
are C-equivalent. Indeed, take a path containing these two edges. Any
two edges incident with a common vertex are C-equivalent as C is locally
connected. Hence any two edges on the path are C-equivalent.
    We define D-equivalent like ‘C-equivalent’ with ‘D’ in place of ‘C’. Now
let f and f 0 be two edges of D. Let e and e0 be edges of C incident with f
and f 0 , respectively. Since C is connected and locally connected the edges
e and e0 are C-equivalent. As C and D have the same edge/face incidence
relation, the edges f and f 0 of D are D-equivalent. So any two edges of D
are D-equivalent. Hence D is connected.
   First, we prove the following, which is reminiscent of euler’s formula.
Lemma 6.3. Let C be a locally connected p-nullhomologous simplicial com-
plex with a planar rotation system and D the dual complex. Then
                       |V (C)| − |E| + |F | − |V (D)| ≥ 0

                                       16
   Moreover, we have equality if and only if D is p-nullhomologous.

Proof. Let ZC be the dimension over Fp of the cycle space of C. Similarly
we define ZD . Let r be the rank of the edge-face-incidence matrix over Fp .
Note that r ≤ ZD and that r = ZC as H1 (C, Fp ) = 0. So ZD − ZC ≥ 0.
Hence it suffices to prove the following.
Sublemma 6.4.

                  |V (C)| − |E| + |F | − |V (D)| = ZD − ZC

Proof. Let kC be the number of connected components of C and kD be the
number of connected components of D. Recall that the space orthogonal
to the cycle space (over Fp ) in a graph G has dimension |V (G)| minus the
number of connected components of G. Hence ZC = |E| − |V (C)| + kC and
ZD = |F | − |V (D)| + kD . Subtracting the first equation from the second
yields:
           |V (C)| − |E| + |F | − |V (D)| + (kD − kC ) = ZD − ZC
Since the dual complex of the disjoint union of two simplicial complexes
(with planar rotation systems) is the disjoint union of their dual complexes,
kC ≤ kD . By Lemma 6.2 kC = kD . Plugging this into the equation before,
proves the sublemma.

     This completes the proof of the inequality. We have equality if and only
if r = ZD . So the ‘Moreover’-part follows.

    Our next goal is to prove the following, which is also reminiscent of
euler’s formula but here the inequality goes the other way round.

Lemma 6.5. Let C be a locally connected simplicial complex with a planar
rotation system Σ and D the dual complex. Then:

                      |V (C)| − |E| + |F | − |V (D)| ≤ 0

with equality if and only if all link complexes for (D, ΣC ) are spheres.

    Before we can prove this, we need some preparation. By a we denote
the sum of the faces of link complexes for (C, Σ). By a0 we denote the sum
over the faces of link complexes for (D, ΣC ). Before proving that a is equal
to a0 we prove that it is useful by showing the following.

Claim 6.6. Lemma 6.5 is true if a = a0 and all link complexes for (D, ΣC )
are connected.

                                      17
Proof. Given a face f of C, we denote the number of edges incident with f
by deg(f ). Our first aim is to prove that
                                           X
                      2|V (C)| = 2|E| −           deg(f ) + a               (1)
                                           f ∈F

    To prove this equation, we apply Euler’s formula [5] in the link complexes
for (C, Σ). Then we take the sum of all these equations over all v ∈ V (C).
Since Σ is a planar rotation system, all link complexes are a disjoint union
of spheres. Since C is locally connected, all link complexes are connected
and hence are spheres. So they have euler characteristic two. Thus we get
the term 2|V (C)| on the left hand side. By definition, a is the sum of the
faces of link complexes for (C, Σ).
    The term 2|E| is the sum over all vertices of link complexes for (C, Σ).
Indeed, each edge of C between the two vertices v and w of C is a vertex of
precisely the two
               P link complexes for v and w.
    The term f ∈F deg(f ) is the sum over all edges of link complexes for
(C, Σ). Indeed, each face f of C is in precisely those link complexes for
vertices on the boundary of f . This completes the proof of (1).
    Secondly, we prove the following inequality using a similar argument.
Given an edge e of C, we denote the number of faces incident with e by
deg(e).                                  X
                      2|V (D)| ≥ 2|F | −    deg(e) + a0                    (2)
                                           e∈E

    To prove this, we apply Euler’s formula in link complexes for (D, ΣC ),
and take the sum over all v ∈ V (D). Here we have ‘≥’ instead of ‘=’ as we
just know by assumption that the link complexes are connected but they
may not be a sphere. So we have 2|V (D)| on the left and a0 is the sum over
the faces of link complexes for (D, ΣC ).
    The term 2|F | is the sum over all vertices of link complexes for (D, ΣC ).
Indeed, each edge of D between the two different vertices v and w of D is a
vertex of precisely the two link complexes for v and w. A loop gives rise to
two vertices inP the link graph at the vertex it is attached to.
    The term e∈E deg(e) is the sum over all edges of link complexes for
(D, ΣC ). Indeed, each face e of D is in the link complex at v with multiplicity
equal to the number of times it traverses Pv. This completes Pthe proof of (2).
                            0
    By assumption, a = a . The sums f ∈F deg(f ) and e∈E deg(e) both
count the number of nonzero entries of A, so they are equal. Subtracting
(2) from (1), rearranging and dividing by 2 yields:



                                      18
                          |V (C)| − |E| + |F | − |V (D)| ≤ 0
with equality if and only if all link complexes for (D, ΣC ) are spheres.

    Hence our next aim is to prove that a is equal to a0 . First we need some
preparation.
    Two cell complexes C and D are (abstract) surface duals if the set of
vertices of C is (in bijection with) the set of faces of D, the set of edges of
C is the set of edges of D and the set of faces of C is the set of vertices of
D. And these three bijections preserve incidences.

Lemma 6.7. Let C be a simplicial complex and Σ be a rotation system and
let D be the dual. The surface dual of a local surface S for (C, Σ) is equal
to the link complex for (D, ΣC ) at the vertex ` of D that corresponds to S.

Proof. It is immediate from the definitions that the vertices of the link
complex L̄ at ` are the faces of S. The edges of S are triples (e, f~, ~g ),
where e is an edge of C and f~ and ~g are orientations of faces of C that are
related via e and are in the local-surface-equivalence class for S. Hence in
D, these are triples (e, f~, ~g ) such that f~ and ~g are directions of edges that
point towards ` and f and g are adjacent in the cyclic ordering of the face
e. This are precisely the edges of the link graph L(`). Hence the link graph
L(`) is the dual graph11 of the cell complex S.
    Now we will use the Edmonds-Hefter-Ringel rotation principle, see [9,
Theorem 3.2.4], to deduce that the link complex L̄ at ` is the surface dual
of S. We denote the unique cell complex that is a surface dual of S by S ∗ .
Above we have shown that L̄ and S ∗ have the same 1-skeleton. Moreover, the
rotation systems at the vertices of the link complex L̄ are given by the cyclic
orientations in the local-surface-equivalence class for S. By Observation 3.3
these local-surface-equivalence classes define an orientation of S. So L̄ and
S ∗ have the same rotation systems. Hence by the Edmonds-Hefter-Ringel
rotation principle L̄ and S ∗ have to be isomorphic. So L̄ is a surface dual of
S.

Proof of Lemma 6.5. Let C be a locally connected simplicial complex and Σ
be a rotation system and let D be the dual. Let ΣC be as defined above. By
  11
     The dual graph of a cell complex C is the graph G whose set of vertices is (in bijection
with) the set of faces of C and whose set of edges is the set of edges of C. And the incidence
relation between the vertices and edges of G is the same as the incidence relation between
the faces and edges of C.


                                             19
Observation 3.2 and Lemma 6.7 every link complex for (D, ΣC ) is connected.
By Claim 6.6, it suffices to show that the sum over all faces of link complexes
of C with respect to Σ is equal to the sum over all faces of link complexes
for D with respect to ΣC . By Lemma 6.7, the second sum is equal to the
sum over all vertices of local surfaces for (C, Σ). This completes the proof
by Lemma 3.5.

Proof of Theorem 6.1. Let C be a p-nullhomologous locally connected sim-
plicial complex that has a planar rotation system Σ. Let D be the dual
complex. Then by Lemma 6.5 and Lemma 6.3, C and D satisfy Euler’s
formula, that is:
                     |V (C)| − |E| + |F | − |V (D)| = 0
Hence by Lemma 6.5 all link complexes for (D, ΣC ) are spheres. By Lemma 6.7
these are dual to the local surfaces for (C, Σ). Hence all local surfaces for
(C, Σ) are spheres.

    The following theorem gives three equivalent characterisations of the
class of locally connected simply connected simplicial complexes embeddable
in S3 .

Theorem 6.8. Let C be a locally connected simplicial complex embedded
into S3 . The following are equivalent.

  1. C is simply connected;

  2. C is p-nullhomologous for some prime p;

  3. all local surfaces of the planar rotation system induced by the topolog-
     ical embedding are spheres.

Proof. Clearly, 1 implies 2. To see that 2 implies 3, we assume that C
is p-nullhomologous. Let Σ be the planar rotation system induced by the
topological embedding of C into S3 . By Theorem 6.1 all local surfaces for
(C, Σ) are spheres.
    It remains to prove that 3 implies 1. So assume that C has an embedding
into S3 such that all local surfaces of the planar rotation system induced
by the topological embedding are spheres. By treating different connected
components separately, we may assume that C is connected. By Lemma 3.4
all local surfaces of the topological embedding are spheres. Thus 3 implies
1 by Lemma 4.6.




                                      20
Remark 6.9. Our proof actually proves the strengthening of Theorem 6.8
with ‘embedded into S3 ’ replaced by ‘embedded into a simply connected
3-dimensional compact manifold.’ However this strengthening is equivalent
to Theorem 6.8 by Perelman’s theorem.

    Recall that in order to prove Theorem 1.2, it suffices to show that every
p-nullhomologous simplicial complex C has a piece-wise linear embedding
into S3 if and only if it is simply connected and C has a planar rotation
system.

Proof of Theorem 1.2. Using an induction argument on the number of cut
vertices as in the proof of Theorem 1.1, we may assume that C is locally
connected. If C has a piece-wise linear embedding into S3 , then it has a
planar rotation system and it is simply connected by Theorem 6.8. The
other direction follows from Theorem 1.1.

Remark 6.10. One step in proving Theorem 1.2 was showing that if a
simplicial complex whose first homology group is trivial embeds in S3 , then
it must be simply connected. In this section we have given a proof that only
uses elementary topology. We use these methods again in [4].
     However there is a shorter proof of this fact, which we shall sketch in
the following. Let C be a simplicial complex embedded in S3 such that one
local surface of the embedding is not a sphere. Our aim is to show that the
first homology group of C cannot be trivial.
     We will rely on the fact that the first homology group of X = S3 \ S1 is
not trivial. It suffices to show that the homology group of X is a quotient of
the homology group of C. Since here by Hurewicz’s theorem, the homology
group is the abelisation of the fundamental group, it suffices to show that
the fundamental group π1 (X) of X is a quotient of the fundamental group
π1 (C).
     We let C1 be a small open neighbourhood of C in the embedding of C in
S3 . Since C1 has a deformation retract onto C, it has the same fundamental
group. We obtain C2 from C1 by attaching the interiors of all local surfaces
of the embedding except for one – which is not a sphere. This can be done
by attaching finitely many 3-balls. Similar as in the proof of Lemma 4.5,
one can use Van Kampen’s theorem to show that the fundamental group of
C2 is a quotient of the fundamental group of C1 . By adding finitely many
spheres if necessary and arguing as above one may assume that remaining
local surface is a torus. Hence C2 has the same fundamental group as X.
This completes the sketch.



                                     21
7        Embedding general simplicial complexes
There are three classes of simplicial complexes that naturally include the
simply connected simplicial complexes: the p-nullhomologous ones that are
included in those with abelian fundamental group that in turn are included
in general simplicial complexes. Theorem 1.2 characterises embeddability of
p-nullhomologous complexes. In this section we prove embedding results for
the later two classes. The bigger the class gets, the stronger assumptions
we will require in order to guarantee topological embeddings into S3 .
    A curve system of a surface S of genus g is a choice of at most g genus
reducing curves in S that are disjoint. An extension of a rotation system Σ
is a choice of curve system at every local surface of Σ. An extension of a
rotation system of a complex C is simply connected if the topological space
obtained from C by gluing12 a disc at each curve of the extension is simply
connected. The definition of a p-nullhomologous extension is the same with
‘p-nullhomologous’ in place of ‘simply connected’.

Theorem 7.1. Let C be a connected and locally connected simplicial com-
plex with a rotation system Σ. The following are equivalent.

     1. Σ is induced by a topological embedding of C into S3 .

     2. Σ is a planar rotation system that has a simply connected extension.

     3. We can subdivide edges of C, do baricentric subdivision of faces and
        add new faces such that the resulting simplicial complex is simply con-
        nected and has a topological embedding into S3 whose induced planar
        rotation system Σ0 ‘induces’ Σ.

    Here we define that ‘Σ0 induces Σ’ in the obvious way as follows. Let C
be a simplicial complex obtained from a simplicial complex C 0 by deleting
faces. A rotation system Σ = (σ(e)|e ∈ E(C)) of C is induced by a rotation
system Σ0 = (σ 0 (e)|e ∈ E(C)) of C 0 if σ(e) is the restriction of σ 0 (e) to the
faces incident with e. If C is obtained from contracting edges of C 0 instead,
a rotation system Σ of C is induced by a rotation system Σ0 of C 0 if Σ is
the restriction of Σ0 to those edges that are in C. If C 0 is obtained from
C by a baricentric subdivision of a face f we take the same definition of
‘induced’, where we make the identification between the face f of C and all
faces of C 0 obtained by subdividing f . Now in the situation of Theorem 7.1,
    12
    We stress that the curves need not go through edges of C. ‘Gluing’ here is on the
level of topological spaces not of complexes.



                                         22
we say that Σ0 induces Σ if there is a chain of planar rotation systems each
inducing the next one starting with Σ0 and ending with Σ.
   Before we can prove Theorem 7.1, we need some preparation. The fol-
lowing is a consequence of the Loop Theorem [12, 6].

Lemma 7.2. Let X be an orientable surface of genus g ≥ 1 embedded
topologically into R3 , then there is a genus reducing circle13 γ of X and a
disc D with boundary γ and all interior points of D are contained in the
interior of X.

Corollary 7.3. Let X be an orientable surface of genus g ≥ 1 embedded
topologically into R3 , then there are genus reducing circles γ1 ,..., γg of X
and closed discs Di with boundary γi such that the Di are disjoint and the
interior points of the discs Di are contained in the interior of X.

Proof. We prove this by induction on g. In the induction step we cut of
the current surface along D. Then we the apply Lemma 7.2 to that new
surface.

Proof of Theorem 7.1. 1 is immediately implied by 3.
     Next assume that Σ is induced by a topological embedding of C into
S3 . Then Σ is clearly a planar rotation system. It has a simply connected
extension by Corollary 7.3. Hence 1 implies 2.
     Next assume that Σ is a planar rotation system that has a simply con-
nected extension. We can clearly subdivide edges and do baricentric subdi-
vision and change the curves of the curve system of the simply connected
extension such that in the resulting simplicial complex C 0 all the curves of
the simply connected extension closed are walks in the 1-skeleton of C 0 . We
define a planar rotation system Σ0 of C 0 that induces Σ as follows. If we
subdivide an edge, we assign to both copies the cyclic orientation of the
original edge. If we do a baricentric subdivision, we assign to all new edges
the unique cyclic orientation of size two. Iterating this during the construc-
tion of C 0 defines Σ0 = (σ 0 (e)|e ∈ E(C)), which clearly is a planar rotation
system that induces Σ. By construction Σ0 has a simply connected extension
such that all its curves are walks in the 1-skeleton of C 0 .
     Informally, we obtain C 00 from C 0 by attaching a disc at the boundary of
each curve of the simply connected extension. Formally, we obtain C 00 from
C 0 by first adding a face for each curve γ in the simply connected extension
whose boundary is the closed walk γ. Then we do a baricentric subdivision
 13
      A circle is a topological space homeomorphic to S1 .



                                             23
to all these newly added faces. This ensures that C 00 is a simplicial com-
plex. Since C is locally connected, also C 00 is locally connected. Since the
geometric realisation of C 00 is equal to the geometric realisation of C, which
is simply connected, the simplicial complex C 00 is simply connected.
     Each newly added face f corresponds to a traversal of a curve γ of some
edge e of C 0 . This traversal is a unique edge of the local surface S to whose
curve system γ belongs. For later reference we denote that copy of e in S
by ef .
     We define a rotation system Σ00 = (σ 00 (e)|e ∈ E(C)) of C 00 as follows. All
edges of C 00 that are not edges of C 0 are incident with precisely two faces.
We take the unique cyclic ordering of size two there.
     Next we define σ 00 (e) at edges e of C 0 that are incident with newly added
faces. If e is only incident with a single face of C 0 , then e is only in a single
local surface and it only has one copy in that local surface. Since the curves
at that local surface are disjoint. We could have only added a single face
incident with e. We take for σ 00 (e) the unique cyclic orientation of size two
at e.
     So from now assume that e is incident with at least two faces of C 0 . In
order to define σ 00 (e), we start with σ 0 (e) and define in the following for each
newly added face in between which two cyclic orientations of faces adjacent
in σ 0 (e) we put it. We shall ensure that between any two orientations we
put at most one new face. Recall that two cyclic orientations f~1 and f~2 of
faces f1 and f2 , respectively, are adjacent in σ 0 (e) if and only if there is a
clone e0 of e in a local surface S for (C 0 , Σ0 ) containing f~1 and f~2 such that e0
is incident with f~1 and f~2 in S. Let f be a face newly added to C 00 at e. Let
γf be the curve from which f is build and let Sf be the local surface that
has γf in its curve system. Let ef be the copy of e in Sf that corresponds
to f as defined above. when we consider f has a face obtained from the
disc glued at γf . We add f to σ 0 (e) in between the two cyclic orientations
that are incident with ef in Sf . This completes the definition of Σ00 . Since
the copies ef are distinct for different faces f , the rotation system Σ00 is
well-defined. By construction Σ00 induces Σ. We prove the following.
Sublemma 7.4. Σ00 is a planar rotation system of C 00 .

Proof. Let v be a vertex of C 00 . If v is not a vertex of C 0 , then the link graph
at v is a cycle. Hence the link complex at v is clearly a sphere. Hence we
may assume that v is a vertex of C 0 .
    Our strategy to show that the link complex S 00 at v for (C 00 , Σ00 ) is a
sphere will be to show that it is obtained from the link complex S 0 for


                                         24
(C 0 , Σ0 ) by adding edges in such a way that each newly added edge traverses
a face of S 0 and two newly added edges traverse different face of S 0 .
     So let f be a newly added face incident with v of C 0 . Let x and y be
the two edges of f incident with v. We make use of the notations γf , Sf , xf
and yf defined above. Let vf be the unique vertex of Sf traversed by γf in
between xf and yf . By Lemma 3.5 there is a unique face zf of S 0 mapped
by the map ι of that lemma to vf . And x and y are vertices in the boundary
of zf . The edges on the boundary of zf incident with x and y are the cyclic
orientations of the faces that are incident with xf and yf in Sf . Hence in
S 00 the edge f traverses the face zf .
     It remains to show that the faces zf of S 0 are distinct for different newly
added faces f of C 00 . For that it suffices by Lemma 3.5 to show that the
vertices vf are distinct. This is true as curves for Sf traverse a vertex of Sf
at most once and different curves for Sf are disjoint.


   Since Σ00 is a planar rotation system of the locally connected simplicial
complex C 00 and C 00 is simply connected, Σ00 is induced by a topological
embedding of C 00 into S3 by Theorem 4.7. Hence 2 implies 3.

   A natural weakening of the property that C is simply connected is that
the fundamental group of C is abelian. Note that this is equivalent to the
condition that every chain that is p-nullhomologous is simply connected.

Theorem 7.5. Let C be a connected and locally connected simplicial com-
plex with abelian fundamental group. Then C has a topological embed-
ding into S3 if and only if it has a planar rotation system Σ that has a
p-nullhomologous extension.

   In order to prove Theorem 7.5, we prove the following.

Lemma 7.6. A p-nullhomologous extension of a planar rotation system of
a simplicial complex C with abelian fundamental group is a simply connected
extension.

Proof. Let C 0 be the topological space obtained from C by gluing discs along
the curves of the p-nullhomologous extension. The fundamental group π 0
of C 0 is a quotient of the fundamental group π of C, see for example [7,
Proposition 1.26]. Since π is abelian by assumption, also π 0 is abelian. That
is, it is equal to its abelisation, which is trivial by assumption. Hence C 0 is
simply connected.



                                       25
Proof of Theorem 7.5. If C has a topological embedding into S3 , then by
Theorem 7.1 it has a planar rotation system that has a p-nullhomologous
extension. If C has a planar rotation system that has a p-nullhomologous
extension, then that extension is simply connected by Lemma 7.6. Hence C
has a topological embedding into S3 by the other implication of Theorem 7.1.



8    Non-orientable 3-manifolds
By Corollary 4.3 and Lemma 4.4 a 2-complex C is embeddable in an ori-
entable 3-manifold if and only if it has a planar rotation system. Here
we discuss a notion similar to planar rotation systems that can be used to
characterise embeddability in 3-manifolds combinatorially.
    A generalised planar rotation system of a 2-complex C is a choice of
embedding of all its link graphs in the plane so that for each edge e of C
in the two link graphs at the endvertices of the edge e, the rotators at the
vertex e are reverse or agree. We colour an edge red if they agree. We have
the further condition that for every face f of C its number of red incident
edges is even.
Remark 8.1. Any planar rotation system defines a generalised planar ro-
tation system. In this induced generalised planar rotation system no edge
is red.
Remark 8.2. Let C be simplicial complex whose first homology group over
the binary field F2 is trivial, for example this includes the case where C is
simply connected. Then C has a planar rotation system if and only if it has
a generalised planar rotation system by Theorem 6.8 and [3, Lemma 4.3].
Remark 8.3. A locally 3-connected 2-complex has a generalised planar
rotation system if and only if every choice of embeddings of its link graphs
in the plane is a generalised planar rotation system. Indeed, any face shares
an even number of edges with every vertex. By local 3-connectedness, the
embeddings of a link graph at some vertex v is unique up to orientation,
which reverses all rotators at edges incident with v. So it flips red edges to
non-red ones and vice versa. Hence the number of red edges modulo two
does not change.
    Thus there is a trivial algorithm that verifies whether a locally 3-connected
2-complex has a generalised planar rotation system: embed the link graphs
in the plane arbitrarily (if possible) and then check the condition at every
edge and face.

                                      26
   The following was proved by Skopenkov.
Theorem 8.4 ([16]). The following are equivalent for a 2-complex C.
   • C has a generalised planar rotation system;
   • C has a thickening that is a 3-manifold;
   • C has a piece-wise linear embedding in some 3-manifold.
Remark 8.5. For 2-dimensional manifolds there are two types of rotation
systems: one for the orientable case and one for the general case. In di-
mension three the situation is analoguous. For orientable 3-manifolds we
have ‘planar rotation systems’ and ‘generalised planar rotation systems’ for
general 3-manifolds.
Remark 8.6. Similarly as for planar rotation systems, the methods of this
series of papers can also be used to also give a polynomial time algorithm
that verifies the existence of generalised planar rotation systems. As men-
tioned in Remark 8.3 the locally 3-connected case is algorithmically trivial
and the reduction to the locally 3-connected case works the same as for
planar rotation systems.
Remark 8.7. The methods of this series of papers can be used to char-
acterise the existence of generalised planar rotation systems in terms of
excluded minors as follows.
    In the locally 3-connected case the list of excluded minors for generalised
planar rotation systems is slightly shorter than for planar rotation systems.
It still contains the obstructions in the list Z1 like the cone over K5 , and also
more complicated obstructions such as that explained in [3, Figure 5]. But
from the list Z2 this list just contains those obstructions that are derived
from those in [3, Lemma 5.12] where the vertices v and w are joined by an
edge.
    Indeed arguing as in the proof of [3, Lemma 4.1], we find an obstruction
sitting either at a vertex, an edge or a face. In the first two cases we just
get obstructions in Z1 . In the third case we can contract two edges of that
face and we only get those obstructions C ∈ Z2 such that the loop ` bounds
a face. In this case in the strict marked graph at the link graph of the
contraction vertex of C, the vertices v and w corresponding to the loop are
joined by an edge.
    The other obstructions in the list Z2 are still necessary obstructions for
embeddability in the 3-sphere but the above shows that under the assump-
tion of simply connectedness and local 3-connectedness, we do not need them
to characterise embeddability in the 3-sphere.

                                       27
    In the general case, however, generalised planar rotation systems need
also some new obstructions compared to planar rotation systems. Indeed,
instead of the torus crossing obstructions we now get the following.
    It is straightforward to check that the torus crossing obstructions, where
the pair (a,b) of winding numbers is different from (1,2), still give obstruc-
tions. Thus it remains to understand the obstructions arising from para-
cycles all of whose winding numbers are one or two. Here additionally we
have Klein Bottle crossing obstructions. These are defined similarly as torus
crossing obstructions but here we partition the set into more than two equiv-
alence classes. These new equivalence classes have winding numbers (1,2,2)
or (1,1,1,2).
    Indeed, given a para-cycle all of whose winding numbers are one or two,
we take a single letter for each equivalence class of winding number one,
and for each equivalence class of size two we take a pair of letters (n, n0 ).
Then the para-cycle has a generalised planar rotation system if and only if
its letters form a word that uses each letter precisely once such that if we
exchange n and n0 for every pair, the resulting word is equal to the original
word or its reverse. For (1,2) there is such a word, namely: 1X10 . For (1,1,2),
such a word is Y 1X10 . So (1,2) and (1,1,2) do not lead to obstructions. All
other families of winding numbers from {1, 2} of size at least three do lead
to obstructions. For that it suffices to show that for the (minimal) families
(1,2,2) and (1,1,1,2) there are no such words. This is an easy exercise14
    To summarise, for the Kuratowski Theorem characterising 2-complexes
with generalised planar rotation systems the list of excluded minors is the
following. It consists of the slightly shorter list for the locally 3-connected
case described above together with the torus crossing obstructions except
for (1,2). Additionally we have the Klein Bottle crossing obstructions (1,2,2)
and (1,1,1,2).


Acknowledgement
I thank Arnaud de Mesmay for useful discussions that led to Section 8.
  14
     To give details, for (1,2,2) we have the letters X, 1, 10 , 2, 20 . There is a unique word
satisfying the requirements if we delete the letter X. It is 1210 20 , up to symmetry. It is
straightforward to check that this word cannot be extended to a legal word by adding X.
   For (1,1,1,2) the letters are X, Y, Z, 1, 10 . By symmetry we may assume that XY 1 is a
subinterval. But this is not contained in any legal word.




                                              28
References
 [1] R. H. Bing. An alternative proof that 3-manifolds can be triangulated.
     Ann. Math.(2), 69:37–65, 1959.

 [2] Ulrich Brehm. A nonpolyhedral triangulated mobius strip. Proc. Amer.
     Math. Soc., 89(3):519–522, 1983.

 [3] Johannes Carmesin. Embedding simply connected 2-complexes in 3-
     space – I. A Kuratowski-type characterisation. Preprint 2017, available
     at ”https://arxiv.org/pdf/1709.04642.pdf”.

 [4] Johannes Carmesin.      Embedding simply connected 2-complexes
     in 3-space – IV. Dual matroids.         Preprint 2017, available at
     ”https://arxiv.org/pdf/1709.04652.pdf”.

 [5] Reinhard Diestel. Graph Theory (5th edition). Springer-Verlag, 2016.
     Electronic edition available at:
     http://diestel-graph-theory.com/index.html.

 [6] Hatcher.   Notes on basic 3-manifold topology.       available at
     ”http://www.math.cornell.edu/ hatcher/3M/3Mfds.pdf”.

 [7] A. Hatcher. Algebraic Topology. Cambridge Univ. Press, 2002.

 [8] Jiri Matousek, Martin Tancer, and Uli Wagner. Hardness of embedding
     simplicial complexes in Rd . J. Eur. Math. Soc. (JEMS), 13(2):259–295,
     2011.

 [9] B. Mohar and C. Thomassen. Graphs on Surfaces. Johns Hopkins,
     2001.

[10] Edwin E. Moise. Affine structures in 3-manifolds. V. The triangulation
     theorem and Hauptvermutung. Annals of Mathematics. Second Series,
     56:96–114, 1952.

[11] C. Papakyriakopoulos. A new proof for the invariance of the homology
     groups of a complex (in greek). Bull. Soc. Math. Grece, 22:1–154, 1946.

[12] C. D. Papakyriakopoulos. On Dehn’s Lemma and the Asphericity of
     Knots. Ann. Math., 66:1–26, 1957.

[13] G. Perelman. The entropy formula for ricci flow and its geometric appli-
     cations. 2002, available at ”https://arxiv.org/abs/math.DG/0211159”.


                                     29
[14] G. Perelman.        Finite extinction time for the solutions to
     the ricci flow on certain three-manifolds.    2003, available at
     ”https://arxiv.org/abs/math.DG/0307245”.

[15] G. Perelman. Ricci flow with surgery on three-manifolds. 2003, available
     at ”https://arxiv.org/abs/math.DG/0303109”.

[16] A. B. Skopenkov. Geometric proof of Neuwirth’s theorem on the con-
     struction of 3-manifolds from 2-demensional [2-dimensional] polyhedra.
     Math Notes, 56(2):827–829, 1994. DOI: 10.1007/BF02110742.




                                     30
