                                             Atomic Embeddability, Clustered Planarity, and Thickenability∗
                                                                          Radoslav Fulek†              Csaba D. Tóth†‡

                                                                                      December 11, 2019




arXiv:1907.13086v2 [cs.CG] 10 Dec 2019
                                                                                             Abstract
                                                     We study the atomic embeddability testing problem, which is a common generalization of
                                                 clustered planarity (c-planarity, for short) and thickenability testing, and present a polynomial-
                                                 time algorithm for this problem, thereby giving the first polynomial-time algorithm for c-
                                                 planarity.
                                                     C-planarity was introduced in 1995 by Feng, Cohen, and Eades as a variant of graph pla-
                                                 narity, in which the vertex set of the input graph is endowed with a hierarchical clustering and we
                                                 seek an embedding (crossing free drawing) of the graph in the plane that respects the clustering
                                                 in a certain natural sense. Until now, it has been an open problem whether c-planarity can be
                                                 tested efficiently, despite relentless efforts. The thickenability problem for simplicial complexes
                                                 emerged in the topology of manifolds in the 1960s. A 2-dimensional simplicial complex is thick-
                                                 enable if it embeds in some orientable 3-dimensional manifold. Recently, Carmesin announced
                                                 that thickenability can be tested in polynomial time.
                                                     Our algorithm for atomic embeddability combines ideas from Carmesin’s work with algorith-
                                                 mic tools previously developed for weak embeddability testing. We express our results purely
                                                 in terms of graphs on surfaces, and rely on the machinery of topological graph theory.
                                                     Finally, we give a polynomial-time reduction from atomic embeddability to thickenabil-
                                                 ity thereby showing that both problems are polynomially equivalent, and show that a slight
                                                 generalization of atomic embeddability to the setting in which clusters are toroidal graphs is
                                                 NP-complete.


                                         1       Introduction
                                         Clustered planarity (for short, c-planarity) was introduced in 1995 by Feng, Cohen, and
                                         Eades [21, 22], motivated by applications in set visualization. Lengauer [31] considered one of
                                         its variants already in the 1980s. The problem can be seen as a hierarchical variant of planarity
                                         testing; a problem for which a linear-time algorithm has been known for a long time [30]. In the
                                         extensive literature devoted to c-planarity and its variants, the complexity status of only restricted
                                         special cases has been established, most notably in [2, 5, 17, 27], see also the somewhat outdated
                                         survey [16]. The c-planarity problem is formally stated as follows.
                                             ∗
                                             Research supported in part by Austrian Science Fund (FWF): M2281-N35, and the National Science Foundation
                                         awards CCF-1422311, CCF-1423615, and DMS-1800734..
                                           †
                                             University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA.
                                           ‡
                                             Department of Mathematics, California State University Northridge, Los Angeles, CA, USA and Department of
                                         Computer Science, Tufts University, Medford, MA, USA.
Problem 1 (C-planarity). We are given a simple graph G = (V, E); a collection C of pairwise
disjoint simple closed curves in R2 ; and
                                      S a map µ : V → R, where R is the set of path connected
components (called regions) of R2 \ C∈C C. Decide whether there exists an embedding ψ of G in
R2 such that ψ(v) ∈ µ(v) and |ψ(e) ∩ C| ≤ 1 for every C ∈ C and every edge e ∈ E.

Embeddability in R3 and thickenability. Note that a graph is a 1-dimensional simplicial
complex. We consider the 2-dimensional analog of graph embeddings in R3 . It is a well-known result
that for every graph G there exists an orientable surface (an orientable 2-dimensional manifold)
S such that G embeds in S. An analogous result fails for 2-dimensional polyhedra (2-polyhedra
for short) and 3-dimensional manifolds (3-manifolds for short). A 2-polyhedron P is thickenable
if P embeds1 in some orientable 3-manifold. It was known at least since the 1960s that testing
whether a 2-polyhedron is thickenable is in NP, which is an immediate consequence of a theorem
by Neuwirth [39]; see also [46]. We restate it as Theorem 3 in Section 4 (in essence, it characterizes
thickenability in terms of so-called link graphs). We remark that Neuwirth’s theorem has been
recently used in [33] in the first step of an algorithm that decides (not necessarily in polynomial
time) whether a given 2-polyhedron embeds to R3 .
    The thickenability problem is formulated as follows. Let H be a finite multigraph without loops
(multiple edges are allowed). Let P = (H, F ) denote a 2-dimensional (abstract) polyhedron,
where F is a set of cycles in H. We assume that every edge of H is contained in at least one
element of F . The multigraph H is the 1-skeleton of P and every element of F is a facet in P .
Note that H might contain a cycle that is not a facet of P .

Problem 2 (Thickenability). Given a 2-polyhedron P = (H, F ), where H is a multigraph
without loops and F is the set of facets of P , decide whether P embeds to some orientable 3-
manifold.

    Recently, Carmesin [14, Section 6] announced that one can test whether a simply connected
2-polyhedron embeds in R3 in quadratic time2 , while embeddability testing for general 2-polyhedra
in R3 is known to be NP-hard [19]. In the case of simply connected 2-polyhedra, thickenability is
equivalent to embeddability in R3 , see for example [13]. Though this equivalence appears to be a
well-known consequence of Perelman’s famous result [41, 40, 42], see also the book [38].
    In fact, Carmesin’s approach deals exclusively with testing the thickenability condition in The-
orem 3 (cf. Section 4). Therefore his approach to the embeddability in R3 applies also to thicken-
ability in general, but it is restricted simply connected 2-polyhedra. In contrast, testing whether a
given 2-polyhedron, that is homeomorphic to a nonorientable surface, embeds in a given 3-manifold
(that is, both the 2-polyhedron and the 3-manifold are given), is already NP-hard [12].

Atomic embeddibility was introduced in [2] and [24, Section 11], see also [25], as a common
generalization of C-planarity and thickenability. It is an extension of the concept of weak
embeddability [2] (also known in topology as approximating simplicial maps by embeddings [37, 43,
45, 47]). We do not define weak embedding here, but remark that its study in computational
geometry was motivated by the special case of a (piecewise linear) weak embeddings of a cycle in
the plane, which corresponds to weakly simple polygons [1, 15, 18].
  1
      In this case, topological and piecewise linear embeddability are equivalent.
  2
      The correctness of the claimed running time has not been confirmed, yet.



                                                            2
    Let G and H be finite multigraphs without loops. To distinguish between G and H in our termi-
nology, the vertices and edges of H are called atoms and pipes, respectively. A map ϕ : G → H
is simplicial if it maps vertices to vertices (i.e., to atoms), edges to vertices or edges (i.e., to atoms
or pipes), and preserves edge-vertex incidences. An instance of atomic embeddability is given by
a simplicial map ϕ : G → H.
    The thickening H of H is an orientable 2-dimensional surface constructed as follows. For
each atom ν ∈ V (H), let S(ν) be a 2-sphere with deg(ν) pairwise disjoint open discs, called
holes, removed. We fix an orientation on S(ν), and define an arbitrary one-to-one correspondence
between the holes of S(ν) and the pipes incident to ν. The thickening H is obtained by gluing the
surfaces S(ν), ν ∈ V (H), as follows; see Fig. 1 (left) for an illustration. For every pipe ρ ∈ E(H),
ρ = νµ, identify the pair of boundaries of the holes corresponding to ρ by an orientation reversing
homeomorphism. In particular, if νµ 6∈ E(H), then S(ν) and S(µ) are disjoint3 .
    An embedding E : G → H is an atomic embedding of G with respect to ϕ if every vertex
v ∈ V (G) is embedded in S(ϕ(v)); and every edge uv ∈ E(G) is embedded as a Jordan arc in
S(ϕ(u)) ∪ S(ϕ(v)) as follows: If ϕ(u) 6= ϕ(v) then the Jordan arc representing uv intersects the
hole corresponding to the pipe ϕ(uv) in exactly one point, which is a proper crossing, or in other
words, a transversal intersection.
Problem 3 (Atomic embeddability). Given a pair of multigraphs without loops, G and H, and
a simplicial map ϕ : G → H, decide whether an atomic embedding of G with respect to ϕ exists.
   We remark that an instance (H, F ) of thickenability corresponds to an instance (G, H) of
atomic embeddability, where H is the same graph both instances, and G is a vertex disjoint
union of cycles (disjoint copies of the cycles in F ).

Results. In this paper, we present a polynomial-time algorithm for atomic embeddability, thereby
giving the first polynomial-time algorithm for c-planarity. Our approach combines ideas from
Carmesin’s work [14] with algorithmic tools previously developed for weak embeddability testing.
In particular, the elementary operation “stretch” (defined below) is based on a similar operation
in [14]. However, by formulating the problem in terms of graphs on surfaces, our results are more
general and perhaps more accessible to the broader community. A polynomial-time algorithm
for c-planarity implies that some other constrained planarity problems that have previously been
reduced to c-planarity are tractable, as well; see [3] and [4, Figure 4].
    We also consider a further generalization of atomic embeddability in which the surfaces
S(ν), ν ∈ V (H), may have higher genus (by attaching additional handles), and show that this
problem is NP-complete even if each surface S(ν) is based on a torus rather than a sphere.
    In the last section, we give a short polynomial-time reduction of atomic embeddability to
thickenability, which shows that both problems are polynomially equivalent.

Simultaneous embeddability of two graphs. Angelini and Da Lozzo [4] proved that there
exists a polynomial time reduction to c-planarity from connected sefe-2, the problem of
deciding simultaneous embeddability of two graphs in the case when the intersection of the two
graphs is connected (see Section 4 for a formal statement of the problem). Therefore our algorithm
gives a polynomial time algorithm for this problem. The general version of the problem, known
as sefe-2, where the intersection of the two graphs may be disconnected, is notoriously difficult.
  3
      The surface H is reminiscent of the ball-and-stick or space-filling models in molecular chemistry.


                                                            3
                              S(ν)
                                         π                  Gϕ (ν)
                                                                              w

                       ρ
                                              v              u                    v




Figure 1: Part of an atomic embedding of G on S(ν), where the atom ν is incident to pipes ρ and
π (left), and the corresponding local graph Gϕ (ν) (right). The virtual vertices u and w in Gϕ (ν)
correspond to the pipes ρ and π, respectively. All other vertices in Gϕ (ν) are ordinary.


Introduced by Brass et al. [10], it subsumes most of the studied planarity variants [44, Figure 2],
and has generated considerable research activity [3, 7, 9, 28]; see also [8] for a survey. Schaefer [44,
Theorem 6.17] realized that c-planarity is reducible in polynomial time to the problem sefe-2.
Therefore it is an unfortunate state of affairs that its complexity status is still unknown. Although,
Carmesin’s and our results give a new hope that a resolution of sefe-2 problem might be within
reach.
    Let us note that there also exists a natural and fairly straightforward polynomial-time reduction
of connected sefe-2 to thickenability, which was found independently by de Mesmay, Kaluža,
and Tancer [11, 35] and these authors. This suggests that thickenability, and hence, atomic
embeddability, is not powerful enough to solve sefe-2 in general without using significantly novel
ideas.

Organization. Section 2 presents a polynomial-time algorithm for atomic embeddability. Sec-
tion 3 shows that a further generalization of the problem is NP-hard. In Section 4, we give a direct
polynomial-time reduction of atomic embeddability to thickenability, which also establishes
a polynomial reduction of another problem, connected sefe-2, to thickenability.


2    Atomic Embeddings
In this section we present a polynomial-time algorithm for atomic embeddability. After defining
local graphs, which are crucial for the algorithm, we present a high-level overview in Section 2.1.
Section 2.2 introduces additional terminology. We reduce a given instance ϕ to normal form (defined
below) in Section 2.3; and introduce five elementary operations on atomic instances in Section 2.4
that are used in our main algorithm. We show how to solve two special cases in linear time in
Sections 2.5 and 2.6. Our main algorithm in Section 2.7 reduces all normal instances to these
special cases. We finish with a running time analysis in Section 2.8.

Local graphs. Let ϕ : G → H be an instance of atomic embeddability. The simplicial map
ϕ : G → H naturally extends to subgraphs of G. For an atom ν ∈ V (H), ϕ−1 [ν] denotes the


                                                   4
subgraph of G mapped to ν by ϕ. For a pipe ρ ∈ E(H), ϕ−1 [ρ] denotes the subset of edges of G
mapped to ρ by ϕ.
     For every atom ν ∈ V (H), we define a multigraph Gϕ (ν), which captures the local structure
of ϕ at the atom ν and its incident pipes; see Fig. 1 for an illustration. (We remark that graphs
Gϕ (ν) are analogous to the graphs C in [2] and the links in [13].)
     The vertices of Gϕ (ν) are in a one-to-one correspondence with the union of the set of vertices
in V (G) mapped by ϕ to ν (that is, V (ϕ−1 [ν])) and the set of pipes incident to ν. Hence, we
can distinguish between ordinary vertices that correspond to vertices in V (ϕ−1 [ν]) and virtual
vertices that correspond to pipes incident to ν. For every edge in E(G) between two vertices in
V (ϕ−1 [ν]) in G, add an edge in Gϕ (ν) between the corresponding vertices. Finally, for every edge
in uv ∈ E(G) where u ∈ V (ϕ−1 [ν]) and v 6∈ V (ϕ−1 [ν]), add an edge Gϕ (ν) between the ordinary
vertex u and the virtual vertex corresponding to ϕ(uv). Thus, edges of Gϕ (ν) are in a one-to-one
correspondence with the union of the edges of G between vertices in V (ϕ−1 [ν]) and the edges of
G mapped to pipes incident to ν by ϕ. Let e ∈ E(G) denote the edge corresponding to an edge
e ∈ E(Gϕ (ν)).
     Note that the virtual vertices form an independent set in Gϕ (ν). An embedding Eν of Gϕ (ν) is
inherited from an atomic embedding E of G, if Eν is obtained from the restriction E to S(ν) by
filling the holes of S(ν) with discs, and then contracting them to points.
     Let E : G → S be an embedding of a graph on an orientable surface. The rotation at a vertex
v ∈ V (G) is the counterclockwise cyclic order of the end pieces of the edges incident to v. The
rotation system of E is the set of rotations of all vertices of G. A vertex v of a planar graph
has a fixed rotation (for short, is fixed) if its rotation in every embedding of the graph in the
plane is unique up to the choice of orientation. For a pair of virtual vertices u and v of Gϕ (µ)
and Gϕ (ν), resp., corresponding to a pipe µν = ρ ∈ E(H), the edges e incident to u (resp., v)
correspond to edges e ∈ ϕ−1 [ρ]. The rotations of u and v in an embedding of all local graphs
in the plane determine two cyclic orders ϕ−1 [ρ]. This allows us, in particular, to define that the
rotations at u and v to be opposite (in other words, reverse) to each other, if the rotation at u
is (uu1 , . . . , uudeg(u) ), at v it is (vvdeg(v) , . . . , vv1 ), and uui = vvi = ui vi ∈ E(G). The rotations
of u and v are compatible if they are the same or opposite to each other; and incompatible
otherwise.
     An instance ϕ of atomic embeddibility is positive if there exists an atomic embedding of
G with respect to ϕ. Two instances, ϕ and ϕ0 , are equivalent if ϕ and ϕ0 are both positive, or ϕ
and ϕ0 are both negative. We can now formulate atomic embeddibility in terms of the rotation
systems of plane embeddings of the graphs Gϕ (ν), ν ∈ V (H).
Observation 1. An instance ϕ : G → H of atomic embeddability is positive if and only if the
graphs Gϕ (ν), ν ∈ V (H), are planar, and they each have embeddings in the plane such that for
every pipe µν ∈ E(H), the virtual vertices corresponding to µν in Gϕ (µ) and Gϕ (ν) have opposite
rotations (in the sense that we consider every edge e incident to a virtual vertex as e).
    For a subset V 0 ⊂ V (G), a V 0 -bridge B in G is a subgraph of G obtained as the union of V 0 ,
a connected component C of G \ V 0 , and all the edges joining a vertex of C with a vertex of V 0 .
We allow B to consist of a single edge between two vertices in V 0 , or a loop incident to a vertex in
V 0 (see Fig. 2(left)). Analogously to Carmesin [13], we also define two special graphs (as possible
local graphs). A p-path is a graph that consists of two vertices (poles) connected by one or more
subdivided edges (Fig. 2(middle)). A p-star is a graph with a unique cut vertex (center) whose
bridges are p-paths with one pole at the center (Fig. 2(right)).

                                                      5
2.1   High Level Overview of the Recognition Algorithm
Given an instance ϕ of atomic embeddiblity, we apply a sequence of elementary operations that
each produces an equivalent instance ϕ0 (with respect to atomic embeddability). Intermediate steps
of our algorithm may detect that the instance is negative when a local graph Gϕ (ν) is nonplanar.
It may also disconnect the graph H, effectively splitting an instance into independent instances.
Ultimately, it reduces ϕ to a family of instances, each of which is either toroidal (where both G
and H are 2-regular), or subcubic (where the maximum degree of all local graphs is at most 3). In
both cases, we can easily test atomic embeddibility in linear time (Sections 2.5 and 2.6). Hence, the
witness of atomic non-embeddibility that is provided by our algorithm is either the non-planarity of
a local graph in an instance produced by a sequence of elementary operations, or negative subcubic
or toroidal instance.
    Let G ∗ denote the disjoint union of all local graphs except those belonging to toroidal subin-
stances. Our algorithm incrementally reduces the maximum degree ∆ = ∆(ϕ) = maxv∈V (G ∗ ) deg(v).
The two key operations for dealing with a vertex v ∈ V (G ∗ ) of degree ∆ ≥ 4 are Stretch(v, .), which
splits v into two vertices of smaller degree (illustrated in Fig. 7), and Contract(.), which contracts
a pipe (illustrated in Fig. 11). Operation Stretch(.) can be applied to a virtual or an ordinary
vertex: If it is applied to an ordinary vertex, it modifies only G and not H, but if it is applied to a
virtual vertex, it modifies both G and H, and in particular it increases the genus of the surface H
by 1. We note that the increase in the genus of H occurs also in the special case that ϕ represents
an instance of c-planarity (when H is initially homeomorphic to a 2-sphere, i.e., when its genus is
0). This explains in part why this approach for the inherently planar problem of c-planarity has
not been considered before. The generalization of c-planarity to surfaces of higher genus allows
for a broader range of operations, but it also poses several technical challenges that had to be
resolved—some of them even indicated that the problem might be NP-complete, which we discuss
next.
    Unfortunately, Stretch(v, .) produces an equivalent instance only if we already have some partial
information about the rotation of vertex v. In general, it cannot reduce the degree of a cut vertex.
This obstacle is overcome with the help of a surprisingly simple operation, Contract(ρ), which
contracts a pair of atoms in H joined by a single pipe ρ into one atom, thereby eliminating a pair
of virtual vertices in G ∗ corresponding to ρ. An almost identical operation is also crucial in our
recent joint work with Akitaya [2] about weak embeddability. Nevertheless, the possibility of using
this operation in the context of (the general case of) c-planarity or atomic embeddability was not
clear to us for some time. The reason is that the operation Contract(ρ) for a pipe ρ = µν can only
be applied in a very restricted setting, essentially if and only if Gϕ (µ) or Gϕ (ν) is a p-path and ρ
corresponds to a pole of that p-path; or if they are both p-stars and ρ corresponds to their centers.
The crucial observation that saves the day, which is implicit in Carmesin’s work, is that after some
preprocessing that resolves 2-cuts with a vertex of degree ∆, we can use the operation Enclose(.),
illustrated in Fig. 6, to turn each cut vertex of degree ∆ into a center of a p-star.
    In order to show that our algorithm runs in polynomial time, we define a nonnegative potential
Φ(ϕ) bounded from above throughout the execution of the algorithm by a polynomial function of
|V (G)| that strictly decreases after every application of Stretch(.) or Contract(.), but unfortunately,
not after every application of Enclose(.), which possibly just creates a pair of new virtual vertices
in G ∗ . Hence, we had to design a charging scheme that controls the growth of G ∗ .
    Several other similar, but less crucial, operations are used in the preprocessing and postprocess-
ing steps of the algorithm, where the preprocessing step normalizes the input instance in order to


                                                   6
allow a relatively smooth runtime analysis, and the postprocessing step handles toroidal instances
and subcubic instances (where ∆(ϕ) ≤ 3).

2.2   Preliminaries
Let G and H be multigraphs without loops (multiple edges are allowed in both H and G). By a
slight abuse of notation, if there is no danger of confusion, we sometimes denote edges by unordered
pairs of their endpoints (even though several edges may connect the same pair of vertices). A path,
cycle, and walk in a graph is always assumed to be a sequence of edges (rather than vertices). Recall
that in order to distinguish G and H in our terminology, the vertices and edges of H are called
atoms and pipes, respectively. We use the convention that vertices and edges of G are denoted by
lower case Roman letters (e.g., u, v, z and e, f, g), respectively, and the atoms and pipes by lower
case Greek letters (e.g., ν, µ and ρ, π).

Cut vertices, 2-cuts, and 2-edge-cuts. Every vertex of degree 2 or less has a unique rotation,
hence it has a fixed rotation. For this reason, we use a topological notion of 1- and 2-cuts, which
is invariant to subdivisions of edges and supression of vertices of degree 2. For a connected graph
G, which is not a cycle, denote by G− the multigraph obtained by supressing all vertices of degree
2. Hence, G− is free of subdivided edges, defined as paths whose internal vertices have degree
2. Note that G− can have loops corresponding to cycles in G that form leaf blocks.
    Let G be a connected graph that is not a cycle. A vertex v ∈ V (G− ) ⊆ V (G) is a proper cut
vertex (or proper 1-cut) of G if there are two or more {v}-bridges in G− . A pair of vertices
{u, v} ⊂ V (G− ) ⊆ V (G) is a proper 2-cut of G if there are at least three {u, v}-bridges in G− , or
there are exactly two {u, v}-bridges in G− , neither of which is an edge in G− . (Note that if there
are exactly two {u, v}-bridges in G− , and one of them is an edge between u and v, then {u, v} is
not a 2-cut in G− .) A pair of edges {e, f } ⊂ E(G), such that at least one vertex incident to e and
one vertex incident to f is of degree at least 3, is a proper 2-edge-cut of G if there exist edges e−
and f − , such that e− and f − were obtained by suppressing internal vertices of degree 2 of a path
containing e and f , respectively, and {e− , f − } is a 2-edge-cut in G− . Finally, for a proper 2-cut
{u, v}, a {u, v}-bridge B is separable if degB (u) ∈ {1, deg(u) − 1} and degB (v) ∈ {1, deg(v) − 1},
otherwise it is nonseparable.

Observation 2. Let G be a connected graph that is not a cycle. If {u, v} is a proper 2-cut and B
is a separable {u, v}-bridge but not a subdivided edge, then there exists a proper 2-edge-cut {e, f }
in G such that u ∈ e and v ∈ f .

   We often tacitly use the following well-known result by Mac Lane [32]. If G is a connected
planar graph, and the rotation of a vertex v is not fixed, then deg(v) ≥ 3 and v participates in a
proper 1- or 2-cut. In particular, if every graph Gϕ (ν), ν ∈ V (H), is a subdivision of a 3-connected
graph, we can use planarity testing to check the conditions in Observation 1, and easily reduce the
atomic embedibility problem to 2SAT (cf. Section 2.6). The challenge is, therefore, to handle the
possible rotations of vertices that participate in proper 1- or 2-cuts in some local graph Gϕ (ν).

2.3   Preprocessing and Data Structures
Our algorithm uses a sequence of elementary operations that dynamically modify a given instance
ϕ : G → H of atomic embeddability. For the running time analysis (Section 2.8), we need to

                                                  7
                               u                        v

u                          v    u                   v          u                  v           v
                               u                        v


Figure 2: A proper 2-cut {u, v} and its three bridges (left), a p-path with poles u and v (middle),
and a p-star centered at v (right).


                               ρ




                      Sµ                     Sν                            Sµ                     Sν

Figure 3: An atomic embedding of G on S(µ) ∪ S(ν) before and after operation Suppress(ρ), where
ρ = µν. The operation eliminates a pipe with at most two edges of G.

maintain data structures that support these operations. We assume that the input specifies G, H,
and ϕ explicitly (i.e., adjacency lists for the graphs G and H, and pointers from the vertices and
edges of G to their images in H under the map ϕ : G → H). The size of an instance ϕ : G → H
is the total number of edges and vertices in the graphs G and H. Before we present our data
structures (which do not maintain H and ϕ explicitly), we preprocess the instance ϕ.
Definition 1. An instance ϕ : G → H of atomic embeddability is normal if
    • the degree of every virtual vertex in every Gϕ (ν), ν ∈ V (H), is 3 or higher; and
    • Gϕ (ν) is connected for all ν ∈ V (H).
    We define an operation that eliminates pipes with 2 or less edges, see Fig. 3.

Suppress(ρ). We are given a pipe ρ ∈ E(H) such that |ϕ−1 [ρ]| ≤ 2. Let µ, ν ∈ V (H) be the two
atoms incident to ρ. Remove the pipe ρ from E(H). If ϕ−1 [ρ] contains one edge, say uv ∈ E(G)
with ϕ(u) = µ and ϕ(v) = ν, then delete uv from E(G), insert two new vertices u0 , v 0 and new
edges uu0 , vv 0 into G, and update ϕ with ϕ(u0 ) = µ and ϕ(v 0 ) = ν. If ϕ−1 [ρ] contains two edges,
say ui vi ∈ E(G) with ϕ(ui ) = µ and ϕ(vi ) = ν, for i ∈ {1, 2}, then delete both u1 v1 and u2 v2 from
E(G), insert two new vertices u0 , v 0 and new edges u1 u0 , u2 u0 , v1 v 0 , and v2 v 0 into G, and update ϕ
with ϕ(u0 ) = µ and ϕ(v 0 ) = ν.
   Since the virtual vertices that correspond to ρ in Gϕ (µ) and Gϕ (ν) have fixed rotations, by
Observation 1, the following is straightforward.
Lemma 1. For every instance ϕ : G → H of atomic embeddability, and every pipe ρ ∈ E(H),
whose corresponding vertices in local graphs have degree less than 3, operation Suppress(ρ) produces
an equivalent instance.
    We define an operation that splits an atom ν if Gϕ (ν) is disconnected, see Fig. 4.

                                                        8
                                                          Sν1                        Sν2




                             Sν
                                                          Sν3                        Sν4
                                                      S
Figure 4: An atomic embedding of G on S(ν) and i S(νi ) before and after, respectively, operation
Split(ν). The operation splits an atom ν ∈ V (H), for which Gϕ (ν) is disconnected, into as many
atoms as the number of connected components in Gϕ (ν).


Split(ν). We are given a local graph Gϕ (ν) whose connected components are C1 , . . . , Ck , for some
k ∈ N. Delete ν from H, introduce new vertices ν1 , . . . , νk in V (H), and introduce a pipe νi µ for
every ρ = νµ ∈ E(H) such that ρ corresponds to a virtual vertex of Ci . Finally, redefine ϕ on
V (ϕ−1 [ν]) as follows: Put ϕ(v) = νi if v ∈ V (Ci ).
    By Observation 1, the following is straightforward.
Lemma 2. For every instance ϕ : G → H of atomic embeddability, an application of Split(ν)
produces an equivalent instance.

     Preprocessing(ϕ). Input: an instance ϕ : G → H of atomic embeddability.

 (1) For every pipe ρ ∈ E(H) with |ϕ−1 [ρ]| ≤ 2, apply Suppress(ρ).

 (2) For every atom ν ∈ V (H), where Gϕ (ν) is disconnected, apply Split(ν).

Lemma 3. For an instance ϕ : G → H of atomic embeddability of size n, Preprocessing runs in
O(n) time and returns an equivalent normal instance ϕ0 .
Proof. By Lemmas 1 and 2, the instance ϕ0 is equivalent to ϕ. Step (1) eliminates virtual vertices of
degree less than 3, and Step (2) does not change the degree of any vertex in local graphs. Step (2)
splits the local graphs Gϕ (ν), ν ∈ V (H), into connected components. Hence, ϕ0 is normal. Step (1)
runs in O(1) time for each pipe of degree less than 3. Step (2) runs in O(m) time for every local
graph Gϕ (ν) with m = m(ν) edges; which yields an overall running time of O(n).

Data Structures. For a normal instance ϕ : G → H, let G be the disjoint union of all local
graphs Gϕ (ν), ν ∈ V (H). We maintain the graphs G and G by adjacency lists. We maintain the
set V (H) of atoms implicitly: Each connected component in G corresponds to an atom ν ∈ V (H).
We maintain the set E(H) of pipes as follows: For every pipe ρ ∈ E(H), we maintain two pointers
to the two virtual vertices in G that correspond to ρ; and also maintain the set ϕ−1 [ρ] ⊂ E(G) of
edges mapped to ρ in a doubly linked list. Furthermore, for each edge uv ∈ ϕ−1 [ρ], with ϕ(u) = µ
and ϕ(v) = ν, we maintain a pointer to ρ, and to the edge in Gϕ (µ) (resp., Gϕ (ν)) that joins the
virtual vertex corresponding to ρ and u (resp., v).
    For every connected component Gϕ (ν) of G, we maintain G−    ϕ (ν) (i.e., the multigraph obtained
by supressing vertices of degree 2), if Gϕ (ν) is not a cycle, by adjacency lists. Furthermore, we

                                                  9
maintain the block tree of G−  ϕ (ν), which is a bipartite graph that represents incidences between
cut vertices and blocks (i.e., maximal 2-connected components). For each block of G−     ϕ (ν), we also
maintain an SPQR decomposition tree introduced by Di Battista and Tamassia [20], which is a
hierarchical decomposition used for representing all 2-cuts and their bridges. For each vertex v of
G, we maintain indicator variables that record whether v is an ordinary or virtual vertex, whether
it is a proper cut vertex or contained in a proper 2-cut. At initialization, all these data structures
can be computed in linear time in the size of G and H. The data structures can be updated in
linear time if necessary. (Currently available dynamic data structures for planarity testing and
SPQR-trees, with sublinear update times, support some but not all of our graph operations.)
     As we shall see, whenever our algorithm creates a pipe of degree less than 3, it is immediately
suppressed. If our algorithm modifies a graph Gϕ (ν) in a way that it disconnects into compo-
nents, then we assume that it immediately splits the corresponding atom ν as described above. In
particular, our data structure supports the operation Split(ν) in 0 time. In the remainder of the
algorithm, we may assume that every instance of atomic embeddability is normal.

2.4   Elementary Operations
In this section we describe operations used in our algorithm for a given instance ϕ : G → H of
atomic embeddibility. Each operation modifies the instance ϕ. Each operation is local in the sense
that it affects an atom ν and possibly one or two of its neighbors. That is, the modifications incur
changes in Gϕ (ν), and possibly in Gϕ (ν 0 ), for some of the neighbors ν 0 of ν.

                                        S(ν)                               S(ν)



                                   v




Figure 5: An atomic embedding of G on S(ν) before and after operation Detach(v). The operation
turns an ordinary vertex v, the center of p-star Gϕ (ν), into deg(v) leaves.

   The following operation turns an ordinary vertex v into deg(v) leaves, see Fig. 5.

Detach(v). Let v be an ordinary vertex in a graph Gϕ (ν) such that every {v}-bridge is a p-
path (that is, either Gϕ (ν) is a p-star with center v, or Gϕ (ν) is a p-path with a pole at v). Let
vu1 , . . . , vudeg(v) denote the edges incident to v in G. Remove v and its incident edges from G.
Then introduce deg(v) new vertices v1 , . . . , vdeg(v) and add edges ui vi , for all i ∈ [deg(v)] to G.
Finally, define ϕ(vi ui ) = ϕ(vui ).
    By Observation 1, the following is straightforward.

Lemma 4. For an instance ϕ : G → H of atomic embeddability, Detach(v) produces an equivalent
instance ϕ0 . The operation can be implemented in O(deg(v)) time.

    In the following we define the operation of enclosing a bridge in Gϕ (ν), see Fig. 6. This operation
is analogous to stretching of a local branch in [14] except that we apply it in a more general setting.


                                                  10
      S(ν)                                           S(ν)                                       S(ν 0 )




       ρ
                                                            ρ


                                                                           νν 0

Figure 6: An atomic embedding of G on S(ν) before and after operation Enclose(B), where B
(colored blue) is a {v}-bridge of Gϕ (ν) and v is a virtual vertex corresponding to the pipe ρ.


Enclose(B). We are given a {v1 , . . . , vk }-bridge B in Gϕ (ν). The operation does not modify G
except for subdividing its edges. We first describe the changes in H, and then the changes in
the local graphs. Create a new atom ν 0 and a new pipe νν 0 . Replace every pipe ρ = µν that
corresponds to a virtual vertex in B \ {v1 , . . . , vk } with a new pipe µν 0 . For every ordinary vertex
u ∈ V (B) \ {v1 , . . . , vk }, set ϕ(u) = ν 0 . For every edge e ∈ E(G), for which the pipe ϕ(e) = ρ = µν
has been replaced by ρ0 = µν 0 , set ϕ(e) = ρ0 . If vi u ∈ E(B), and vi or u is a virtual vertex of
Gϕ (ν), then subdivide vi u ∈ E(G) by a vertex w and define ϕ(w) as follows: If vi is virtual, then
put ϕ(w) = ν; otherwise put ϕ(w) = ν 0 . Finally, update the definition of ϕ on the edges of B
according to the value of ϕ on the vertices of G (this is uniquely determined since νν 0 is not a
multiple pipe in E(H)).
    For the purpose of the running time analysis the effect of the operation on Gϕ (ν) is that
we move the subgraph induced by B \ {v1 , . . . , vk } from Gϕ (ν) into a new graph Gϕ (ν 0 ), and
introduce a virtual vertex corresponding to the pipe νν 0 in both Gϕ (ν) and Gϕ (ν 0 ), whose degree
is ki=1 degB (vi ). We will be often tacitly using the following lemma.
   P

Lemma 5. Given an instance of atomic embeddability ϕ, an application of PEnclose(B) results in
an equivalent instance ϕ : G → H . The operation can be implemented in O( ki=1 degB (vi )) time.
                        0   0   0


Proof. The equivalence is a consequence of Observation 1.
   For the forward direction, given the set of embeddings Eµ of Gϕ (µ), µ ∈ V (H), inherited from
an atomic embedding of G, we construct embeddings Eµ0 of Gϕ0 (µ), µ ∈ V (H 0 ), inherited from an
atomic embedding of G0 as follows. For µ ∈          / {ν, ν 0 }, we put Eµ0 = Eµ . The embedding of Eν0 0 is
obtained from Eν |B by identifying v1 , . . . , vk , which are incident to a common face, thereby turning
them into a single virtual vertex corresponding to the pipe νν 0 . Finally, Eν0 is obtained from Eν by
contracting B \ {v1 , . . . , vk } into a single virtual vertex corresponding to the pipe νν 0 .
   For the opposite direction, given the set of embeddings Eµ0 of Gϕ (µ), µ ∈ V (H 0 ), inherited from
an atomic embedding of G0 , we construct embeddings Eµ of Gϕ (µ), µ ∈ V (H), inherited from an
atomic embedding of G as follows. For every µ ∈ V (H) \ {ν}, we put Eµ = Eµ0 . Finally, Eν is
obtained from the atomic embedding of G0 on S(ν) ∪ S(ν 0 ) by filling the holes corresponding to
pipes, except for νν 0 , and contracting the fillings to points.

   In the following we define the operation that replaces a vertex u in Gϕ (µ) by an edge uu0 , and

                                                    11
                                                                      a4        S(µ)                     a4   S(µ)
                              a6        a5
          a6                                         a1             a3 a5               a1
               a5                                             a2               a6                a2    a3 a5 a6
                                             a4
                    a4         u                                          ρ                 ρ0                ρ
a1
           u                  u0
                    a3                       a3
                         a1                                               b5                                 b5 b
                                                    b1                         b6      b1                         6
     a2                                                        b3                                 b3
                                   a2                    b2          b4                     b2          b4
                S(µ)                         S(µ)                              S(ν)                               S(ν)

Figure 7: An atomic embedding of G on S(ν) before and after applying Stretch(u, {uv1 , uv2 , uv3 }).
Vertex u is either ordinary (left) or virtual (right). If u is a virtual vertex, it corresponds to a pipe
ρ = µν.


distributes the edges incident to u among u and u0 . The operation produces an equivalent instance
if the rotation of u is fixed, see Fig. 7.

Stretch(u, Eu ). We are given a vertex u in Gϕ (µ) and a set Eu = {ua1 , . . . , ua` } of edges incident
to u where 0 < |Eu | < deg(u). We distinguish between two cases, depending on whether u is an
ordinary or a virtual vertex.
     If u is ordinary, then remove the edges ua1 , . . . , ua` , introduce a new vertex u0 and a new edge
uu0 , as well as new edges u0 a1 , . . . , u0 a` in Gϕ (µ).
     If u is virtual, then let ρ = µν ∈ E(H) be the pipe corresponding to the virtual vertex u in
Gϕ (µ) and v in Gϕ (ν); and assume that uai = ai bi , for i ∈ [`], where b1 , . . . , b` are vertices in
Gϕ (ν). Do the following: Introduce a new pipe ρ0 = µν in H corresponding to new virtual vertices
u0 in Gϕ (µ) and v 0 in Gϕ (ν); introduce a new connected component in G, which is a cycle with two
vertices and two parallel edges f, f 0 forming a multiple edge such that ϕ(f ) = ρ and ϕ(f 0 ) = ρ0 ;
and finally, modify ϕ by setting ϕ(ai bi ) = ρ0 , for all i ∈ [`]. In local graphs this corresponds to
replacing uai and vbi with u0 ai and v 0 ai , respectively, for all i ∈ [`]; and inserting two new edges
uv and u0 v 0 in the two local graphs, respectively, and subdividing each with an ordinary vertex.
    For the purposes of the running time analysis (below) the effect of the operation can be seen
as the replacement of u by an edge whose two endpoints have degrees ` + 1 and deg(u) − ` + 1,
respectively (hence the sum of their degrees equals deg(u) + 2). If u is a virtual vertex (i.e.,
corresponds to a pipe between two atoms), then both virtual vertices corresponding to the same
pipe go through these changes. By Observation 1, the following is straightforward.

Lemma 6. Given an instance of atomic embeddability ϕ such that the edges in Eu are incident to
u, and are consecutive in the rotation of vertex u in every embedding of Gϕ (µ) inherited from an
atomic embedding of G, then the operation Stretch(u, Eu ) produces an equivalent instance.

Corollary 1. For an instance ϕ : G → H of atomic embeddability, if a vertex u ∈ V (Gϕ (ν)) has a
fixed rotation, in which the edges in Eu are consecutive, then Stretch(u, Eu ) produces an equivalent
instance.

   The operation of contraction that follows is applied to an edge ρ = νµ of H and it produces an
equivalent instance if each of Gϕ (ν) and Gϕ (µ) is a p-star or p-path.



                                                    12
Contract(ρ). We are given a pipe ρ = µν such that ρ is the only pipe between µ and ν. Contract
the pipe µν in H into an atom hµνi and change ϕ accordingly (that is, put ϕ(u) = hµνi for all the
vertices mapped by ϕ to µ or ν). Let ϕ0 denote the resulting instance. Note that Gϕ0 (hµνi) might
be disconnected, in which case operation Split(hµνi) is automatically applied to obtain a normal
instance, as explained in Section 2.3. Since ρ is the only pipe between µ and ν the operation does
not introduce a loop in H.
    Several incarnations of the following lemma, which is a consequence of Belyi’s theorem [6], were
proved in related papers; see for example, [2, Lemma 3.2], [25, Claim 7], or [26, Lemma 6].

Lemma 7. Let µν ∈ E(H) be a pipe such that either (i) both Gϕ (µ) and Gϕ (ν) are p-stars, or
(ii) Gϕ (µ) or Gϕ (ν) is a p-path; and in both cases, ρ corresponds to vertices u and v of maximum
degree in Gϕ (µ) and Gϕ (ν), respectively. Then Contract(µν) produces an equivalent instance ϕ0 .

Proof. Denote by ϕ0 : G → H 0 the map returned by Contract(µν). First assume that ϕ : G → H
is atomic embeddable. Then there exists an atomic embedding E : G → H (where every vertex
a ∈ V (G) is embedded in S(ϕ(a)); and every edge ab ∈ E(G) is embedded as a Jordan arc in
S(ϕ(a)) ∪ S(ϕ(b)) as specified in the definition of atomic embedding). Let S(hµνi) = S(µ) ∪ S(ν).
Then the thickening H0 of H 0 equals H, and the embedding E : G → H = H0 witnesses that
ϕ0 : G → H 0 is atomic embeddable.
    Conversely, assume that ϕ0 : G → H 0 is atomic embeddable. Let E 0 : G → H0 be an atomic
embedding. Consider the restriction of E 0 : G → H0 on the surface S(hµνi). Filling the holes of
S(hµνi) with discs, and then contract them to points, to obtain an embedding of Gϕ0 (hµνi) on the
sphere S 2 .
    First, assume that (i) both Gϕ (µ) and Gϕ (ν) are p-stars: Gϕ (µ) is the union of internally vertex
disjoint paths between u and a vertex set Va , and similarly Gϕ (ν) is the union of internally vertex
disjoint paths between v and a vertex set Vb . Consequently, Gϕ0 (hµνi) is the union of internally
vertex disjoint paths between vertices in Va and Vb . (Note that Gϕ0 (hµνi) need not be connected.)
By suppressing the internal vertices of the paths between Va and Vb , we obtain an embedding of a
bipartite multigraph G−  ϕ0 (hµνi) with partite sets Va and Vb on S .
                                                                      2

    By Belyi’s theorem [6], there exists a Jordan curve β : S 1 → S 2 that intersects every edge of
  −
Gϕ0 (hµνi) in exactly one point, and the intersection is transversal. The curve β partitions S 2 into
two parts, A and B. We can subdivide the edges of G−     ϕ0 (hµνi) to obtain an embedding of Gϕ (hµνi)
                                                                                                0

on a sphere such that the curve β crosses an edge e ∈ E(Gϕ0 (hµνi)) if and only if e ∈ ϕ−1 [ρ].
Consequently, by contracting A (resp., B) into a vertex v (resp., u), we obtain an embedding of
Gϕ (ν) (resp., Gϕ (µ)) on a sphere, where the vertices u and v have opposite rotations. Observation 1
now implies that ϕ : G → H is atomic embeddable.
    Next assume that (ii) Gϕ (µ) or Gϕ (ν) is a p-path: Without loss of generality, assume that Gϕ (µ)
is a p-path, with poles u and w. Consequently, Gϕ0 (hµνi) is a subdivision of Gϕ (ν), obtained by
subdividing the edges incident to v. In particular G−                               −
                                                        ϕ0 (hµνi) is isomorphic to Gϕ (ν), where vertex
w in G−                                          −
        ϕ0 (hµνi) corresponds to vertex v in Gϕ (ν). By imposing the rotation of w on v (and the
opposite rotation on u), Observation 1 implies that ϕ : G → H is atomic embeddable, completing
the proof.

   Our last operation deletes a cut edge of a subcubic local graph; see Fig. 8 for an illustration.




                                                  13
                        w                                        w                               w
        u                                       u                                    u
                 ρ                                        v0                              v0
                                                     v
                                                                                     v
            Sν              Sµ                      Sν               Sµ                              Sµ


Figure 8: An atomic embedding of G on S(ν) ∪ S(µ) before and after operation Delete(uv), where
uv ∈ Gϕ (ν) and uw = uv. The operation reduces the degree of a virtual vertex v of Gϕ (ν) such
that v is incident to a cut-edge, and at most 3 edges of G pass through its corresponding pipe ρ.


Delete(e). We are given a cut edge e = uv in a subcubic local graph Gϕ (ν). If both u and v are
ordinary vertices, then delete uv from E(G) (thereby disconnecting Gϕ (ν) into two components
and invoking Split(ν)). Else assume w.l.o.g. that u is ordinary and v is virtual. Let ρ = µν be
the pipe that corresponds to v in Gϕ (ν) and a vertex v 0 in Gϕ (µ), and let uw ∈ E(G) be the
edge corresponding to uv, that is, uw = uv = v 0 w, where v 0 w ∈ Gϕ (µ). Delete the edge uw from
G (thereby reducing the degree of ρ to 2), then Suppress(ρ) (which turns v and v 0 into ordinary
vertices), and finally insert an edge v 0 w into both G and Gϕ (µ).

Lemma 8. For every instance ϕ : G → H of atomic embeddability, an application of Delete(e)
produces an equivalent instance ϕ0 .

Proof. First, assume that ϕ is atomic embeddable. If both u and v are ordinary vertices, then the
deletion of edge uv produces an atomic embeddable instance by Observation 1 and Lemma 2. If u is
ordinary and v is virtual, then we can clearly delete uv = uw from G, suppress the pipe ρ of degree
at most 2, and insert the edge v 0 w (which was already present in Gϕ (µ) before the operation). By
Observation 1, and Lemmas 1 and 2, ϕ0 is atomic embeddable.
     Conversely, assume that ϕ0 is atomic embeddable. Then there exists an atomic embedding
E : G0 → H0 with respect to ϕ0 , where H0 is the thickening of H 0 . Note that ϕ0 (u) 6= ϕ0 (v) since
  0

ϕ0 is normal and uv was a cut edge in Gϕ (ν). Let νu , νv ∈ V (H 0 ) be atoms such that ϕ0 (u) = νu
and ϕ0 (v) = νv . Recall that the embedding E 0 determines a rotation system on all local graphs of
ϕ0 . Consider disjoint plane embeddings of Gϕ0 (νu ) and Gϕ0 (νv ) with the rotation systems inherited
from E 0 such that u and v are incident to a common face. If v is a virtual vertex of degree 3 in
Gϕ (ν) (hence v 0 has degree 3 in Gϕ0 (µ)), we can choose plane embeddings of Gϕ0 (νu ) and Gϕ0 (νv )
with the additional property that the insertion of the edge uv as a Jordan arc between u and v
yields the embedding of Gϕ (ν) in which the rotation at v is opposite to the rotation of v 0 in Gϕ0 (µ).
All other local graphs of ϕ are the same as in ϕ0 , and their rotation systems are inherited from E 0 .
By Observation 1, ϕ is atomic embeddable.

2.5   Toroidal Instance
An instance ϕ : G → H is toroidal if H is a cycle and for every atom ν ∈ V (H), the graph Gϕ (ν)
is a p-path in which both poles are virtual vertices, and correspond to the two pipes incident to ν.
    Given an instance ϕ : G → H and a subgraph H 0 ⊆ H, such that the restriction of ϕ to
G = ϕ−1 [H 0 ], denoted ϕ0 : G0 → H 0 , is toroidal, we say that H 0 is a toroidal cycle in H.
  0

    In this section, we show how to decide toroidal instances of atomic embeddability in linear time.
First, note that in a toroidal instance every ordinary vertex has degree 2, hence G is a disjoint union

                                                    14
of cycles, say C1 , . . . , Ct , for some t ∈ N. Furthermore, ϕ maps each cycle Ck , k ∈ [t], to a walk
that winds around H once or more times.

Lemma 9. Let ϕ : G → H be a toroidal instance of atomic embeddability, where H is a cycle, and
G is a vertex disjoint union of cycles C1 , . . . , Ct . The instance ϕ is positive if and only if ϕ(Ck ) is
a walk of the same length for all k ∈ [t] (that is, every cycle winds around the torus H the same
number of times).

    Roughly speaking, Lemma 9 follows by the intersection form of the closed curves on the torus.
Indeed, whether a pair of curves could be crossing free on the torus is governed by their homology
classes [29, Example 2A.2. and Corollary 3A.6.(b)] over Z.

Proof. In an atomic embedding, each cycle Ck is embedded on the torus H as a closed curve, whose
homology class over Z is given by a pair (ik , jk ) ∈ Z2 , where we assume w.l.o.g. that the first
component ik is the length of the walk ϕ(Ck ) divided by |V (H)|. In particular, we may assume
that ik > 0. Since in an atomic embedding, Ck is mapped to a Jordan curve in H, its homology
class must be primitive [34, 36], or in other words, gcd(ik , jk ) = 1, for all k ∈ [t].
    The “if” part follows by observing that the restriction of ϕ to a cycle Ci is a positive instance,
no matter how many times ϕ(Ci ) winds around H. Indeed, a desired atomic embedding lies in
the primitive homology class (ik , 1). A sufficiently small neighborhood of the embedding of Ci in
H is homeomorphic to an annulus, into which all cycles C1 , . . . , Ct can be embedded given the
hypothesis is satisfied. It remains to prove “only if” part.
    It is well-known that the minimum number of crossings between a pair of closed curves in
homology classes (ik , jk ) and (i` , j` ) is given as the absolute value of
                                                       
                                             0 −1         i`
                                  ik jk                        = i` jk − ik j` ,
                                                 1 0       j`
which counts the algebraic intersection of the pair, see [48, Section 6.4.3], and in particular Ex-
ercise 6.4.3.2. therein4 . Since the cycles C1 , . . . , Ct embed into H as pairwise disjoint curves in
an atomic embedding, we have i` jk − ik j` = 0 for every pair of distinct k, ` ∈ [t]. It follows that
jk    j`
ik = i` . Since gcd(ik , jk ) = 1, gcd(i` , j` ) = 1, ik > 0, and i` > 0, we have that ik = i` and jk = j` ,
which concludes the proof.

Corollary 2. We can decide whether a toroidal instance ϕ : G → H is atomic embeddable in time
O(n), where n is the number of edges and vertices in G.

Proof. Under the assumptions, G is the union of vertex disjoint cycles C1 , . . . , Ct , for some t ∈ N.
We report that the instance is positive if and only if ϕ(Ci ) is a walk of the same length for all
k ∈ [t]. This algorithm is correct by Lemma 9. It runs in linear time in the size of G, as the length
of the walks ϕ(Ci ), i ∈ [t], can be computed in a simple traversal of G.
   4
     We refrain from properly defining algebraic intersection, since we will not need it in the sequel, and refer an
interested reader to [48]. To the readers who are unfamiliar with the intersection form it might be only clear that the
absolute value of the expression gives a lower bound on the number of crossings between the curves. Nevertheless,
for our purpose this lower bound is sufficient, and therefore we do not delve into more details to show that the lower
bound is always tight.




                                                          15
2.6   The Subcubic Case
An instance ϕ : G → H of atomic embeddability is subcubic if Gϕ (ν) is subcubic (i.e., its
maximum degree is at most 3) for every ν ∈ V (H). In this section, we show how to decide subcubic
instances of atomic embeddibility in linear time. By Observation 1, it is enough to check whether
all graphs Gϕ (ν), ν ∈ V (H), are planar, and they each have embeddings in the plane such that for
every pipe µν ∈ E(H), the virtual vertices corresponding to µν in Gϕ (µ) and Gϕ (ν) have opposite
rotations.
    Planarity testing for a graph takes linear time [30]. Let n be the number of vertices and edges
in G. Then the disjoint union of all local graphs G has O(n) size (since each vertex in V (G)
corresponds to a unique ordinary vertex, and every edge in E(G) corresponds to one or two edges
in G). Hence planarity testing for G takes O(n) time.
    In the subcubic case, every vertex in the local graphs Gϕ (ν), ν ∈ V (H), has at most two possible
rotations (including the vertices of 1- and 2-cuts). We show how to encode the possible embeddings
of each local graph by a boolean variable, and then reduce the existence of compatible embeddings
to a 2SAT formula, which can be solved in O(n) time.
    We start with a postprocessing algorithm that eliminates 1- and 2-edge-cuts from local graphs.

      Postprocessing. We are given a subcubic instance ϕ : G → H of atomic embeddability.

 (1) While there exists a cut edge e in some Gϕ (ν), ν ∈ V (H), apply Delete(e).

 (2) While there exists a proper 2-edge-cut {e, f } in a local graph of ϕ, such that e = u1 v1
     and f = u2 v2 , where both v1 and v2 are in a {u1 , u2 }-bridge B of Gϕ (ν), apply Enclose(B)
     (creating a new pipe ρB of degree 2), and Suppress(ρB ).

Lemma 10. For a subcubic instance ϕ of atomic embeddability of size n, Postprocessing runs in
O(n) time, and it returns an equivalent subcubic instance ϕ0 of size O(n) in which every local graph
is a cycle, a p-path, or a subdivided 3-connected planar graph.

Proof. The while loop in Step (1) decreases the number of edges in E(G), so it terminates after
O(n) iterations, and uses O(n) time. The while loop in Step (2) decreases the number of 2-edge-cuts
in local graphs, and hence, it also terminates after O(n) iterations in O(n) time. By Lemmas 1, 8,
and 5, the instance ϕ0 : G0 → H 0 returned by the Postprocessing algorithm is equivalent to ϕ.
    Step (1) can only decrease the degree of a local graph, and Step (2) creates a pair of ordinary
vertices of degree 2. Since ϕ is a subcubic instance, ϕ0 is also subcubic. When the algorithm
terminates, then G−  ϕ0 (ν) has neither cut edges nor 2-edge-cuts, for all ν ∈ V (H ).
                                                                                      0

    We claim that every local graph Gϕ0 (ν), ν ∈ V (H 0 ), is biconnected. (Note that we assume that
  0
ϕ is normal, and hence, Gϕ0 (ν) is connected.) Let v be an arbitrary vertex in Gϕ0 (ν). Vertex v
is incident to at least two edges in each {v}-bridge, otherwise we would find a cut edge. However,
deg(v) ≤ 3, so there is at most one {v}-bridge, and v is not a cut vertex. This completes the proof
of the claim.
    It remains to show that every local graph Gϕ0 (ν), ν ∈ V (H 0 ), is a cycle, a p-path, or a subdivided
3-connected graph. Consider a graph Gϕ0 (ν). Suppose it is neither a cycle not a subdivided 3-
connected graph. Let {u, v} be a proper 2-cut. If degB (u) = degB (v) = 1, for some {u, v}-bridge
B, then B is a uv-path, as otherwise the edges incident to u and v in B would form a 2-edge-cut
in G−ϕ0 (ν). The number of {u, v}-bridges is at least 2 and at most 3, since Gϕ (ν) is subcubic. If
                                                                                       0




                                                   16
there are three {u, v}-bridges, then degB (u) = degB (v) = 1 for every {u, v}-bridge B, and hence,
every {u, v}-bridge is a uv-path, and so Gϕ0 (ν) is a p-path. Suppose now that there are two {u, v}-
bridges. Then neither bridge can be a uv-path, otherwise {u, v} would not be a proper 2-cut.
Therefore max{degB (u), degB (v)} ≥ 2 for every {u, v}-bridge B. Since Gϕ0 (ν) is subcubic, this
implies min{degB (u), degB (v)} = 1 for both bridges. By Observation 2, there are edges e = uu0
and f = vv 0 in the two bridges that form a 2-edge-cut in G− ϕ0 (ν), contradicting the assumption that
no such 2-edge-cut exists.

Lemma 11. We can decide whether a subcubic instance ϕ : G → H is atomic embeddable in O(n)
time, where n is the number of edges and vertices in G and H.

Proof. By Lemma 10, we may assume that every local graph Gϕ (ν), ν ∈ V (H), is a cycle, a subcubic
p-path, or a subdivided 3-connected planar graph. We can ignore cycles, as vertices of degree 2 have
only one rotation. Every subdivided 3-connected planar graph has two possible rotation systems
given by an embedding, that are equivalent up to a reflection. In every embedding of a p-path with
poles u and v, the cyclic order of the {u, v}-bridges around u and v are reverse of each other. If
deg(u) = deg(v) = 3, the three {u, v}-bridges have two possible cyclic orders, that is, the p-path
have two possible rotation systems in a plane embedding.
     For every local graph Gϕ (ν), ν ∈ V (H), that is a p-path or a subdivided 3-connected graph, we
introduce a boolean variable xν , which is the indicator variable for the two possible rotation systems
of Gϕ (ν) in a plane embedding. In other words, we fix an embedding of Gϕ (ν) corresponding to
xν = 1, and then the reflected embedding corresponds to xν = 0. Since ϕ is a normal instance,
every pipe has degree 3, that is, it corresponds to two virtual vertices of degree 3 in two local
graphs. In particular, for every pipe ρ = µν, both xµ and xν are defined. For every pipe ρ = µν,
we introduce a constraint xµ = xν if the rotations of its two corresponding virtual vertices in Gϕ (µ)
and Gϕ (ν) in the embedding of Gϕ (µ) and Gϕ (ν), respectively, corresponding to xν = 1 and xµ = 1
are opposite of each other; and xµ = ¬xν otherwise.
     These constraints yield an instance of 2SAT with O(|V (H)|) boolean variables and O(|E(H)|)
constraints, which can be solved in O(n) time. If the 2SAT instance is positive then the graphs
Gϕ (ν), ν ∈ V (H), each have an embedding in the plane such that for every pipe µν ∈ E(H),
the corresponding virtual vertices in Gϕ (µ) and Gϕ (ν) have opposite rotations. It follows that ϕ
is a positive instance by Observation 1. Conversely, if ϕ is a positive instance, then the atomic
embedding of G induces plane embeddings of the local graphs such that for every pipe µν ∈ E(H),
the corresponding virtual vertices have opposite rotations. By construction, the indicator variables
xν , ν ∈ V (H), satisfy all constraints of the 2SAT instance.

2.7   Main Algorithm
We define two subroutines and then present our main algorithm. Subroutine 1 ensures that our
instance has some desirable properties, and Subroutine 2 decreases the maximum degree over all
local graphs Gϕ (ν), for all atoms ν ∈ V (H), that are not contained in a toroidal cycle C of H.
    The crucial part of our algorithm reduces the maximum degree in local graphs over all atoms
that are not in toroidal cycles. Specifically, for an instance ϕ of atomic embeddability, let

   • V ∗ (H) (resp., E ∗ (H)) be the set of atoms (resp., pipes) in H that are not in any toroidal
     cycle of H; and



                                                  17
                                         v                                                      v

             ρ



                                      S(ν)                                                    S(ν)

Figure 9: An atomic embedding of G on S(ν) before and after Step (i), where u is a virtual vertex
of Gϕ (ν) corresponding to the pipe ρ, and v is an ordinary vertex of Gϕ (ν).

   • let ∆(ϕ) be the maximum degree over all vertices of all local graphs Gϕ (ν), ν ∈ V ∗ (H), if
     V ∗ (H) 6= ∅, and let ∆(ϕ) = 2 if V (H) = ∅.
    We first call Subroutine 1 for a normal instance ϕ, and show that it returns an equivalent
instance in which the proper 1- and 2-cuts in local graphs Gϕ (ν), ν ∈ V ∗ (H), are in a special form,
as described in terms of the following definition.
Definition 2. An instance ϕ of atomic embeddability is d-nice, for d ≥ 3, if it meets the following
two conditions:
(N1) ∆(ϕ) ≤ d.
(N2) If deg(v) = d for a vertex v of some local graph Gϕ (ν), ν ∈ V (H), then v has a fixed rotation,
     or Gϕ (ν) is a p-path or a p-star.
(N3) If ρ = µν ∈ E(H), such that both Gϕ (µ) and Gϕ (ν) are p-stars, and ρ corresponds to virtual
     vertices of degree at least d, then ρ is the only pipe between µ and ν.
   We present a subroutine that takes a normal instance ϕ as an input, and returns a ∆-nice
normal instance for the maximum degree ∆ over all local graphs, that is, ∆ = ∆(ϕ) (as shown in
Lemma 12 and Corollary 4 below).
      Subroutine 1. Input: a normal instance ϕ of atomic embeddability, where ∆(ϕ) ≥ 4.
  (i) While there is a proper 2-cut {u, v} and a nonseparable {u, v}-bridge B in Gϕ (ν), for some
      ν ∈ V (H), such that max{deg(u), deg(v)} = ∆, but neither u nor v is a cut vertex, then do
      the following: Perform Stretch(u, Eu ), where Eu is the set of edges in E(B) incident to u;
      and perform Stretch(v, Ev ), where Ev is the set of edges in E(B) incident to v. If u or v is a
      virtual vertex corresponding to a pipe µν and Gϕ (µ) is nonplanar, report that the instance
      ϕ is not atomic embeddable and exit the subroutine.
 (ii) While there is a proper 2-edge-cut {e, f } in Gϕ (ν), for some ν ∈ V (H), then let e = u1 v1 and
      f = u2 v2 such that both v1 and v2 are in a {u1 , u2 }-bridge B of Gϕ (ν), then apply Enclose(B)
      (creating a new pipe ρB of degree 2), and Suppress(ρB ).
 (iii) While there is a proper cut vertex v with deg(v) = ∆ in some local graph of ϕ, then suc-
       cessively apply Enclose(B) for every bridge B of v (thereby turning every bridge of v into a
       p-path). Apply Suppress(ρB ) if applicable.

                                                 18
                        S(ν 0 )             v1                                S(ν 0 )          v1
                                                  ρB                                    v2

                                                                              ρB
 v                u               v2             u1          v          u
                                                                                   u2               u1
                                       u2
                                                           S(ν)                 S(ν)
 S(ν)
                             S(ν)

Figure 10: The operation Enclose(B) in Step (ii) eliminates every proper 2-cut {u, v} in Gϕ (ν) that
has exactly two {u, v}-bridges. Either one of the {u, v}-bridges is separable (left), or there exists a
separable {u1 , u2 }-bridge such that degB (u1 ) = degB (u2 ) = 1 (right).


   In Section 2.8 (cf. Corollary 4), we show that Subroutine 1 terminates and analyse its running
time. Here we prove that if it terminates, it returns a ∆(ϕ)-nice instance.

Lemma 12. For an instance ϕ of atomic embeddibility, if Subroutine 1 terminates, it either returns
an equivalent, normal, and ∆(ϕ)-nice instance ϕ0 , or reports that ϕ is not atomic embeddable.

Proof. Let ∆ = ∆(ϕ) for short. By Lemmas 1, 5, and 6, Subroutine 1 returns an equivalent instance
ϕ0 upon termination. Note that instance ϕ0 is normal, since we apply Suppress(νB ) to any pipe of
degree less than 3. The operations in Subroutine 1 do not increase the maximum degree in any
local graph outside of toroidal cycles; and make no changes at all in local graphs in toroidal cycles.
Consequently, ∆(ϕ0 ) ≤ ∆.
    At the end of Step (i), every {u, v}-bridge is separable for every proper {u, v}-cut where
max{deg(u), deg(v)} = ∆; see Fig. 9. We consider Step (ii) now. Suppose that {u, v} is a proper
2-cut in Gϕ (ν), such that min{deg(u), deg(v)} ≥ 3 and max{deg(u), deg(v)} = ∆
    If there exist exactly two (separable) {u, v}-bridges in Gϕ (ν) (none of which is a subdivided edge
as otherwise {u, v} would not be a proper 2-cut), then Step (ii) eliminates the proper 2-cut {u, v}
by a single application of Enclose(.), due to Observation 2, and does not introduce any new proper
2-cut. Indeed, up to symmetry there are two cases to consider depending on whether degB (u) = 1
or degB (u) = deg(u) − 1, and degB (v) = 1 or degB (v) = deg(v) − 1; see Fig. 10.
    If there exist at least three (separable) {u, v}-bridges in Gϕ (ν) such that max{deg(u), deg(v)} =
∆, then Step (ii) turns Gϕ (ν) into a p-path with the poles u and v.
    Hence, at the end of Step (ii), for every proper 2-cut {u, v} we have (a) max{deg(u), deg(v)} <
∆; or (b) u or v is a cut vertex of degree ∆; or (c) u and v are the poles of a p-path. In particular,
every vertex w with deg(w) = ∆ in a local graph Gϕ (µ), is a proper 1-cut, or a pole of a p-path,
or has fixed rotation.
    Step (iii) successively turns every cut vertex of degree ∆ into the center of a p-star. It creates
new 2-cuts within these p-stars and possibly in adjacent atoms, but it does not create any new vertex
of degree ∆. Hence, at the end of Subroutine 1 ϕ satisfies (N1) and (N2). For property (N3), note
that by enclosing all the bridges of the center of every p-star in G of degree ∆, Step (iii) eliminates
possible problematic multiple pipes ρ = µν in H, where ρ corresponds to a pair of centers of p-
stars Gϕ (µ) and Gϕ (ν). Overall, the instance ϕ0 returned by Subroutine 1 upon termination meets
conditions (N1)–(N3), consequently ϕ0 is ∆-nice.




                                                      19
      G               Gϕ (µ0 )                Gϕ (µ1 )                   Gϕ (µ2 )                Gϕ (µ3 )




          H   µ0                      µ1                     µ2                       µ3
                      ρ1 = µ0 µ1              ρ2 = µ1 µ2                 ρ3 = µ2 µ3




          G            Sµ0                   Sµ1                   Sµ2                     Sµ3




          G            Sµ0                                         Sµ01                    Sµ3




          G                                                        Sµ00                    Sµ3



                                                                     ρ03


                                                                     ρ3

          G                                                       Sµ00                 Sµ3

Figure 11: A path (ρ1 , ρ2 , ρ3 ) in H through the atoms µ0 , . . . , µ3 . The graph Gϕ (µ0 ) is a p-star,
Gϕ (µ1 ) and Gϕ (µ2 ) are p-paths, and Gϕ (µ3 ) is 3-connected. In each local graph, the virtual vertices
corresponding to ρ1 , ρ2 , or ρ3 are vertices of maximum degree. The bottom three subfigures show
the effect of Step (iv.a) and Step ((v.c)) of Subroutine 2 on the graph G in this instance.




                                                    20
      G         u1     Gϕ (µ)                    Gϕ (ν)
                                   v1




                                        v2
                u2                                                            Sµ                     Sν
          H                ρ1
               µ                         ν
                          ρ2

           Figure 12: An illustration of the setting in Step (iv.b), analogous to Fig. 11.


Degree reduction. We are now ready to present the crucial subroutine of our algorithm that
reduces ∆(ϕ) by eliminating all vertices of degree ∆(ϕ) that are not in toroidal cycles. (See Figs. 11
and 12 for the possible relations between virtual vertices of degree ∆(ϕ).)

     Subroutine 2. Input: a normal and ∆-nice instance ϕ of atomic embeddability, where
     ∆ = ∆(ϕ) and ∆ ≥ 4.

(iv) While there exists a pipe µν ∈ E ∗ (H) of degree ∆ such that Gϕ (µ) or Gϕ (ν) is a p-path, do
     the following. Suppose w.l.o.g. that Gϕ (µ) is a p-path.

      (a) If µν is not a multiple edge apply Contract(µν).
      (b) Else there exists a pair of pipes ρ1 and ρ2 joining µ with ν. Let ui and vi , resp., be
          virtual vertices in Gϕ (µ) and Gϕ (ν) corresponding to ρi for i ∈ {1, 2}. Note that u1
          and u2 are the poles of the p-path Gϕ (µ); and both v1 and v2 are fixed due to (N2),
          as µ is not in a toroidal cycle. Apply Stretch(v1 , E1 ) and Stretch(v2 , E2 ), where Ei is a
          set of b∆/2c consecutive edges in the rotation at vi , for i ∈ {1, 2}. If Gϕ (µ) becomes
          nonplanar, report that the instance is not atomic embeddable and exit the subroutine.

 (v) For every pipe µν ∈ E ∗ (H) of degree ∆ that corresponds to virtual vertices u and v in Gϕ (µ)
     and Gϕ (ν), respectively, do:

      (a) If both u and v have fixed rotations (in Gϕ (µ) and Gϕ (ν), resp.), then check whether
          the two rotations are compatible. If they are incompatible, then report that ϕ is not
          atomic embeddable and exit the subroutine. Otherwise apply Stretch(u, Eu ), where Eu
          is a set of b∆/2c consecutive edges in the rotation of u.
      (b) If neither u nor v has a fixed rotation, then apply Contract(µν). This contracts µν
          into a new atom, denoted by hµνi, and combines Gϕ (µ) and Gϕ (ν) into a new graph
          Gϕ (hµνi). If Gϕ (hµνi) is nonplanar, report that ϕ is not atomic embeddable and exit
          the subroutine.
       (c) Else assume w.l.o.g. that u has fixed rotation in Gϕ (µ), and is incident to edges (uv1 , . . . , uv∆ )
           in this cyclic rotation order. Successively apply Stretch(u, .), turning vertex u into an
           induced binary tree with ∆ − 2 vertices. If Gϕ (ν) is nonplanar, report that the instance
           is not atomic embeddable and exit the subroutine.



                                                     21
 (vi) For every ordinary vertex v ∈ V (Gϕ (ν)), ν ∈ V (H), with deg(v) = ∆ that has fixed rotation,
      apply Stretch(v, Ev ), where Ev is a set of b∆/2c consecutive edges in the rotation of v.

(vii) For every ordinary vertex v ∈ V (Gϕ (ν)), ν ∈ V (H), with deg(v) = ∆ that is part of a 1- or
      2-cut, apply Detach(v).

    This completes the description of Subroutine 2. In Section 2.8 we show that Subroutine 2
terminates and analyse its running time. In Lemma 14 below, we prove that if it terminates, it
returns an instance ϕ0 with ∆(ϕ0 ) < ∆(ϕ). We first clarify when an operation Stretch(.) can create
a proper 1- or 2-cut.
Lemma 13. Let u be a vertex in Gϕ (ν) such that deg(u) ≥ 4, and assume that operation Stretch(u, .)
produces an instance ϕ0 in which u is replaced by an edge uu0 . If u is not a proper 1-cut in Gϕ (ν),
then neither u nor u0 is a proper 1-cut in Gϕ0 (ν). If u neither is a proper 1-cut nor belongs to a
proper 2-cut in Gϕ (ν), then neither u nor u0 belongs to a proper 2-cut in Gϕ0 (ν).
Proof. For the sake of contradiction suppose w.l.o.g. that u0 is a proper 1-cut in Gϕ0 (ν). If we
contract the edge uu0 back into the vertex u, the vertex u is a proper 1-cut in Gϕ (ν). Indeed, if B
is the {u0 }-bridge containing u, then B contains at least 3 edges since deg(u) ≥ 3. Thus, the bridge
B gives rise to a {u}-bridge after we contract uu0 .
      Similarly, suppose that u0 or u belongs to a proper 2-cut {v, w} of Gϕ0 (ν). If we contract the
edge uu0 back into the vertex u, no loops are created, since uu0 is not a multiple edge. We show
that the vertex u belongs to a proper 2-cut in Gϕ (ν) or is a proper 1-cut. The proper 2-cut {v 0 , w0 }
or 1-cut {v 0 } in Gϕ (ν) is constructed as follows. We put v 0 = u and w0 = u if v ∈ {u, u0 } and
w ∈ {u, u0 }, respectively, and we put v 0 = v and w0 = w, otherwise. The proper 2-cut {v 0 , w0 } is, in
fact, a proper 1-cut if v 0 = w0 = u.
      To see that {v 0 , w0 } is a proper 1-cut if v 0 = w0 , we observe that vw = uu0 and apply the
definitions of a proper 1-cut and proper 2-cut. Otherwise, w.l.o.g. v = u, and thus, v 0 = u. Let
B denote the {v, w}-bridge containing uu0 edge. The bridge B is not a (subdivided) edge, since
deg(u0 ) ≥ 3 and w 6= u0 . Thus, after contracting uu0 , the bridge B gives rise to at least one
{v 0 , w0 }-bridge that is not a subdivided edge. Hence, {v 0 , w0 } is a proper 2-cut.

Lemma 14. For a ∆(ϕ)-nice instance ϕ : G → H of atomic embeddability, if Subroutine 2 termi-
nates, then it either returns an equivalent normal instance ϕ0 : G0 → H 0 such that ∆(ϕ0 ) < ∆(ϕ),
or reports that ϕ is not atomic embeddable.
Proof. Let ∆ = ∆(ϕ). We show that every step of Subroutine 2 maintains a ∆-nice normal instance
equivalent to ϕ until it terminates; and it either returns such an instance ϕ0 or reports that ϕ0 is
not atomic embeddable. Subroutine 2 maintains a normal instance until termination, since it does
not create virtual vertices of degree 2 and Split(.) is applied automatically whenever a local graph
disconnects into two or more components.
    Step (iv.a) produces an equivalent instance by Lemma 7: Each Contract(.) operation merges a
local graph Gϕ (ν) with a p-path Gϕ (µ) and produces a new local graph Gϕ (hµνi), where G−   ϕ (hµνi)
is isomorphic to G− ϕ (ν), so the instance  remains   ∆-nice.  In Step (iv.b), the two invocation  of
Stretch(.) produce an equivalent instance by Lemma 6. At the end of Step (iv), none of the local
graphs outside of toroidal cycles is a p-path of degree ∆.
    In Step (v.a), the rotation of the virtual vertices u and v must be compatible in any atomic
embedding by Observation 1. If they are compatible, then operation Stretch(u, .) produces an

                                                   22
equivalent instance by Corollary 1; and the resulting instance is still ∆-nice since no new proper
1-cut or 2-cut is introduced in Gϕ (µ) and Gϕ (ν) by Lemma 13.
    In Step (v.b), both Gϕ (µ) and Gϕ (ν) are p-star, centered at u, and v resp., since instance
is ∆-nice, and p-paths of degree ∆ have already been eliminated. By Lemma 7, Contract(µν)
produces an equivalent instance. The resulting instance is still ∆-nice, since the maximum degree
of Gϕ (hµνi) is less than ∆; and Gϕ (hµνi) is planar if ϕ is atomic embeddable by Observation 1.
    In Step (v.c), operation Stretch(u, .) for a fixed vertex u yields an equivalent instance by Corol-
lary 1. If the rotation of u is incompatible with a p-star centered at v, Stretch(u, .) may turn
Gϕ (ν) into a nonplanar graph, and then ϕ is not atomic embeddable by Observation 1. Note that
Gϕ (ν) is a p-star, since p-paths have been eliminated in Step (iv). Successive Stretch(.) operations
eliminate the only vertex of degree ∆ of Gϕ (ν), namely v. The graph Gϕ (µ)− remains 3-connected
by Lemma 13, and so the resulting instance is ∆-nice.
    The equivalence of Step (vi) follows by Lemma 6, and the resulting instance is still ∆-nice, since
operation Stretch(v, .) does not introduce a 1-cut in Gϕ (ν) that would violate the ∆-nice property
by Lemma 13.
    In Step (vii), operation Detach(u) is applied in a ∆-nice instance, hence it produces an equivalent
instance by Lemma 4, which obviously remains ∆-nice.
    For the remainder of the proof, assume that Subroutine 2 returns an instance ϕ0 . The operations
in Subroutine 2 do not increase the maximum degree outside of toroidal cycles; and make no changes
within toroidal cycles. Consequently, ∆(ϕ0 ) ≤ ∆.
    It remains to prove that ∆(ϕ0 ) < ∆, i.e., that Subroutine 2 eliminates vertices of degree ∆ from
all local graphs outside of toroidal cycles; call these vertices ∆-critical. Since ϕ is ∆-nice, every
∆-critical vertex in a local graph has a fixed rotation, or it is a center of a p-star, or a pole of a p-
path. Steps (iv)–(vii) each eliminate one or two ∆-critical vertices (possibly a pair of corresponding
virtual vertices), and do not create any new ∆-critical vertices. Steps (iv)–(v) eliminate all possible
∆-critical virtual vertices; and Steps (vi)–(vii) eliminate all ∆-critical ordinary vertices. Since
Subroutine 2 maintains a ∆-nice instance, it ultimately eliminates all ∆-critical vertices, and so
∆(ϕ0 ) < ∆, as claimed.

Algorithm.     We are given a normal instance ϕ of atomic embeddability.

  (I) While ∆(ϕ) ≥ 4, do the following.

       (a) Call Subroutine 1 (which turns ϕ into a ∆-nice instance) followed by Subroutine 2 (which
           reduces ∆(ϕ)). If Subroutine 1 or Subroutine 2 reports that the instance ϕ is not atomic
           embeddable return False and terminate the algorithm.

 (II) For each connected component C of H, let G(C) = ϕ−1 [C].

       (a) If C is a toroidal cycle of H, decide atomic embeddability for ϕ|G(C) using Corollary 2.
       (b) Else decide atomic embeddability for ϕ|G(C) using Lemma 11.

(III) If ϕ|G(C) is atomic embeddable for all components C of H, then return True; else return
      False.

   In Section 2.8 we show that the Algorithm terminates and analyse its running time. Here we
show that if it terminates it correctly decides the atomic embeddability problem.


                                                   23
Lemma 15. Suppose that Algorithm terminates for an instance ϕ : G → H. Then the algorithm
returns True if and only if ϕ is atomic embeddable.

Proof. Since the input ϕ is normal, it is a valid input for Subroutine 1 in the first iteration of
Step (I.a). By Lemma 12, Subroutine 1 returns a ∆(ϕ)-nice instance and therefore the input for
Subroutine 2 is valid. In any subsequent iteration of Step (I.a), Subroutine 1 receives a valid input
as Subroutine 2 returns a normal instance ϕ∗ (however, this instance need not be ∆(ϕ∗ )-nice). By
Lemma 12 and Lemma 14, the while loop in Step (I) terminates after at most ∆(ϕ) − 3 iterations,
and returns an equivalent instance (or correctly reports that ϕ is not atomic embeddable). If the
Algorithm proceeds to Steps (II)–(III), the correctness of the output follows from Corollary 2 and
Lemma 11.

2.8    Running Time Analysis
Potential Functions. We measure the progress of the algorithm, for an instance ϕ : G → H,
using three parameters defined as follows. Recall that G denotes the disjoint union of all local
graphs Gϕ (ν), ν ∈ V (H).

   • Let N (ϕ) = |V (G)|, that is, be the number of vertices of G.
   • let N≥3 (ϕ) = |{v ∈ V (G) : deg(v) ≥ 3}|, i.e., the number of vertices of G of degree 3 or higher.
   • Let the potential of ϕ be
                                            X
                                  Φ(ϕ) =             (max{0, deg(v) − ξ(v)})σ(v) ,
                                           v∈V (G)

      where ξ(v) = 2 and σ(v) = 3 if v is a proper cut vertex, ξ(v) = 2 and σ(v) = 2 if v is part of
      a proper 2-cut but not a cut vertex, and ξ(v) = 3 and σ(v) = 1 otherwise.

Note that max{0, deg(v) − 2} = 0 if deg(v) ≤ 2, that is, the vertices of local graphs of degree less
than 3 do not contribute to the potential. Clearly deg(v) < N (ϕ) for every v ∈ V (G), and so
Φ(ϕ) ≤ N 4 (ϕ) is a trivial upper bound. Our analysis hinges on the following charging scheme:

Overview. We show below (Lemma 19) that each iteration of Step (I.a) of the Algorithm de-
creases the potential. This readily implies that the while loop in Step (I) terminates (hence the
Algorithm terminates, which completes the proof of correctness). Recall that Step (I.a) runs Sub-
routines 1 and 2, that is, it applies Steps (i)–(vii). We show that both the number of elementary
operations performed and the number of new vertices created in Steps (i)–(vii) are bounded from
above by a constant times the decrease of the potential. Step (ii) does not change the potential,
so we need additional machinery to bound its running time: We use the parameters N (ϕ) and
N≥3 (ϕ). We continue with the specifics.

Analysis. Recall that each iteration of the while loop of Step (I) of the Algorithm, which calls
Subroutine 1 followed by Subroutine 2. The two subroutine jointly perform Steps (i)–(vii). We
use the following notation. Assume that ϕ0 is the input of Subroutine 1, and we obtain instances
ϕ1 , . . . , ϕ7 at the end of Step (i),. . .,(vii). Denote by Gi the union of all local graphs in the instance
ϕi for i = 1, . . . , 7. The following lemma is helpful for the analysis of Step (i).


                                                        24
Lemma 16. Let {u, v} be a proper 2-cut in a local graph Gϕ (ν) such that max{deg(u), deg(v)} ≥ 4;
and let B be a nonseparable {u, v}-bridge. Then one iteration of the while loop in Step (i) produces
an instance ϕ0 such that Φ(ϕ0 ) < Φ(ϕ) and N (ϕ0 ) ≤ N (ϕ) + 4.

Proof. If u (resp., v is ordinary), then operation Stretch(.) creates 1 new vertex in G; and if it is
virtual, it creates at most 2 new vertices in G. Overall at most 4 new vertices are created, all of
which are of degree 3 or higher. That is, N (ϕ0 ) ≤ N (ϕ) + 4.
    In the following we analyze how the operation impacts the degree of vertices. If u is an ordinary
vertex, then Stretch(.) changes its degree from deg(u) to deg(u)−degB (u)+1 ≤ deg(u); and creates
a new vertex of degree degB (u) + 1 ≤ deg(u). If u is a virtual vertex, corresponding to a pipe ρ,
then both virtual vertices corresponding to ρ go through the same changes.
    By Lemma 13, the new vertices created by Stretch(.) are not cut vertices (although they may
participate in proper 2-cuts). If u is a virtual vertex, then the corresponding virtual vertex w in an
adjacent atom µ might be a cut vertex or a vertex in a proper 2-cut. By Lemma 13, if w or a new
vertex w0 created by Stretch(u, .) in Gϕ0 (µ) is a proper cut vertex (resp., contained in of a proper
2-cut), then so is w in Gϕ (µ). In particular, for any existing vertex z in Gϕ (µ) (including vertex
w), the exponent σ(z) cannot increase, ξ(z) cannot decrease. Consequently, the contribution of z
to the potential cannot increase.
    The change in the potential incurred by u is most

                    (degB (u) − 1)2 + (deg(u) − degB (u) − 1)2 − (deg(u) − 2)2 ,

which is nonpositive by convexity, and equals to zero if and only if degB (u) = 1. Since B is a
nonseparable {u, v}-bridge, we have max{degB (u), degB (v)} ≥ 2, and the two Stretch(.) operations
at u and v jointly decrease the potential.

Corollary 3. Let ϕ0 be a normal instance of atomic embeddability and let ∆ = ∆(ϕ0 ). Then the
while loop in Step (i) terminates and returns an instance ϕ1 , after at most Φ(ϕ0 )−Φ(ϕ1 ) iterations,
such that N (ϕ1 ) ≤ N (ϕ0 ) + 12(Φ(ϕ0 ) − Φ(ϕ1 )).

Proof. By Lemma 16, each iteration of the while loop in Step (i) decreases the potential. Conse-
quently, the while loop terminates, and performs at most Φ(ϕ) − Φ(ϕ0 ) iterations. Each iteration
applies up to two Stretch(.) operations, at u or v for some proper {u, v}-cut, and increases the
number of vertices by at most 4. By Lemma 16, the number of vertices increases by at most 4 times
the decrease of the potential. Summation over all iterations of the while loop in Step (i) yields
N (ϕ1 ) ≤ N (ϕ0 ) + 4(Φ(ϕ0 ) − Φ(ϕ1 )).

   We can now focus on Steps (ii)–(vii).

Lemma 17. Let ϕ1 be an instance returned by Step (i). Then the while loop in Step (ii) terminates
after at most N≥3 (ϕ1 ) iterations, and it returns an instance ϕ2 such that N (ϕ2 ) < N (ϕ1 ) +
2N≥3 (ϕ1 ), N≥3 (ϕ2 ) = N≥3 (ϕ1 ), and Φ(ϕ2 ) = Φ(ϕ1 ).

Proof. Let ϕ be an instance at the beginning of one iteration of the while loop in Step (ii). Since
ϕ is normal, every local graph Gϕ (ν) is connected. Let {e, f } be a proper 2-edge-cut in Gϕ (ν),
let e = u1 v1 and f = u2 v2 such that both v1 and v2 are in a {u1 , u2 }-bridge B. Note that each
component of Gϕ (ν) \ {e, f } contains a vertex that has degree at least 3 in Gϕ (ν), otherwise one
of the components would be a path, and the 2-edge-cut would not be proper. In one iteration


                                                 25
of Step (ii), an operation Enclose(.) replaces Gϕ (ν) with two local graphs obtained by removing
edges e and f , and inserting two new paths (u1 , wu , u2 ) and (v1 , wv , v2 ), where wu and wv are new
ordinary vertices of degree 2. In particular, Φ and the number of vertices of degree at least 3 do
not change, and the total number of vertices in G increases by 2.
     It follows that Φ(ϕ2 ) = Φ(ϕ1 ) and N≥3 (ϕ2 ) = N≥3 (ϕ1 ). Since each iteration in the while loop
of Step (ii) increases the number of components of G, but each new component contains at least
one vertex of degree 3 or higher, the number of iterations is at most N≥3 (ϕ) − 1. Summation over
all iterations yields N (ϕ2 ) ≤ N (ϕ1 ) + 2N≥3 (ϕ1 ) − 2.

   Now we are ready to show that Subroutine 1 terminates.

Corollary 4. For an instance ϕ0 of atomic embeddibility of size n, Subroutine 1 terminates.

Proof. By Corollary 3 the while loop in Step (i) terminates. By Lemma 17, Step (ii) terminates
and eliminates all proper 2-edge-cuts containing an edge that is incident to a vertex of degree
∆ = ∆(ϕ0 ). Finally, in the while loop of Step (iii), each iteration decreases the number of vertices
of degree ∆ in local graphs that are not p-stars. Therefore this while loop terminates, as well.

   Note that Step (iii) increases the potential. We analyse the combined effect of Steps (iii)–(vii),
and show that they jointly decrease the potential, and we can charge the number of operations, as
well as the number of new vertices to the decrease of the potential. The following observation will
be helpful.

Lemma 18. Let d and d1 , . . . , dk be positive integers such that d = ki=1 di , d ≥ 4, and k ≥ 2.
                                                                      P
Then we have
                                         k
                                         X                    k
                                                              X
                                  3                        2
                    (d − 2) ≥ (2d − 5) +   (max{0, di − 2}) +   (max{0, di − 2})3 .                                                       (1)
                                                       i=1                                        i=1

Proof. We distinguish among three cases. In Case 1, k = d (hence di = 1 for all i ∈ [k]). Then the
right hand side of (1) is less than 2(d − 2). Clearly, 2(d − 2) ≤ (d − 2)3 for d ≥ 4.
    In Case 2, we assume that 2 < k < d. First note that for every i ∈ [k], we have di − 1 ≥
max{0, di − 2}, and so (di − 1)3 ≥ (max{0, di − 2})3 + (max{0, di − 2})2 . Elementary calculation
yields


                   k
                              !         !3           k
                                                                !                        !3                       k
                                                                                                                               !3
                   X                                 X                                                            X
(d − 2)3 =               di       −2         =             di       −k+k−2                    =     (k − 2) +           (di − 1)
                   i=1                               i=1                                                          i=1
                              k
                              X                                                                     k
                                                                                                    X
         =(k − 2) +   3                          3                  2
                                      (di − 1) + 3(k − 2) (d − k) + 3(k − 2)                               (di − 1)2 +
                              i=1                                                                   i=1
                               Xk                                                  k
                                                                                   X                k
                                                                                                    X
             + 6(k − 2)                 (di − 1)(d − di − k + 1) +                       (di − 1)         (dj − 1)(d − dj − k + 1)
                                  i=1                                              i=1              j=1
             k
             X                                                      k
                                                                    X                                       k
                                                                                                            X
         ≥         (di − 1)3 + 3(k − 2)2 (d − k) ≥                            (max{0, di − 2})3 +                 (max{0, di − 2})2 + (2d − 5),
             i=1                                                        i=1                                 i=1



                                                                              26
where we have dropped some nonegative terms, and used the inequality 3(k−2)2 (d−k) ≥ 3(d−3) ≥
(2d − 5) + (d − 4) ≥ 2d − 5 for d ≥ 4.
    In Case 3, assume k = 2. Then, using d ≥ 4 again, we have


                         2
                                       !3     2              2            2
                         X                    X              X            X
                3                                       3
        (d − 2) =              (di − 1)     ≥   (di − 1) + 3   (di − 1) =   (di − 1)3 + 3(d − 2)
                         i=1                  i=1                 i=1           i=1
                        k
                        X                           k
                                                    X
                    >         (max{0, di − 2})3 +         (max{0, di − 2})2 + (2d − 5),
                        i=1                         i=1

as claimed.

Lemma 19. Consider Steps (iii)–(vii) in an invocation of Subroutine 1 followed by Subroutine 2.
We have Φ(ϕ2 ) > Φ(ϕ7 ), N (ϕ7 ) ≤ N (ϕ2 ) + O(Φ(ϕ2 ) − Φ(ϕ7 )), and the number of operations
performed in Steps (iii)–(vii) is O(Φ(ϕ2 ) − Φ(ϕ7 )).

Proof. None of these steps increases the number of vertices of degree ∆ or higher in local graphs.
Ultimately all vertices of degree ∆ outside of toroidal cycles are eliminated.

Overview. Each operation in Steps (iii)–(vii) is associated to either a unique vertex of degree ∆,
or two virtual vertices of degree ∆ that correspond to the same pipe. In Step (iii) and Steps (vi)–
(vii), this is vertex v; in Steps (iv)–(v), these are virtual vertices u and v corresponding to the pipe
µν. We consider each vertex v of degree ∆ in the instance ϕ2 , and analyse how the operations
associated with v change the potential and the total number of vertices over Steps (iii)–(vii).
Let D(Φ, v) and D(N, v), resp., denote the changes in Φ(.) and N (.) incurred by the operations
associated with vertex v. We claim that for every vertex v of degree ∆ in G2 , we have

                                                    D(Φ, v) ≤ 0,                                      (2)

with equality if and only if v is a a local graph Gϕ2 (ν) where ν is in a toroidal cycle; and

                                            D(N, v) + 20 D(Φ, v) ≤ 0.                                 (3)
Note that (2) holds with a strict inequality for at least one vertex v. Indeed, we have ∆ = ∆(ϕ3 ) =
∆(ϕ2 ), and so there is a vertex of degree ∆ in some local graph of ϕ2 outside of toroidal cycles.
Summation over all vertices of degree ∆ then yields

                                             X
              Φ(ϕ7 ) = Φ(ϕ2 ) +                           D(Φ, u) < Φ(ϕ2 ),
                                     u∈V (G2 ):deg(u)=∆
                                             X
              N (ϕ7 ) = N (ϕ2 ) +                          D(N, u) ≤ N (ϕ2 ) + 20(Φ(ϕ2 ) − Φ(ϕ7 )).
                                      u∈V (G2 ):deg(u)=∆




                                                            27
Elimination of p-paths. Recall that each iteration of Step (iv.a) applies Contract(µν) on a pipe
µν corresponding to virtual vertices u in Gϕ (µ) and v in Gϕ (ν). Without loss of generality, assume
that Gϕ (µ) is a p-path with poles u and w. Operation Contract(µν) eliminates u and v, and creates
a new local graph Gϕ (hµνi) where G−   ϕ (hµνi) is isomorphic to Gϕ (ν). For the analysis of D(Φ, .)
and D(N, .), we assume that this operation eliminates u and w; and vertex v of Gϕ (ν) survives in
Gϕ (hµνi). Thus, the effect of Contract(µν) is neutral for v, although v may become an ordinary
vertex if w is ordinary before the operation.
    Inequalities (2)–(3) clearly hold for any vertex v in toroidal cycles. For all other vertices of
degree ∆, we distinguish between three cases as follows.

Vertices of fixed rotation. Let v be a vertex of fixed rotation with deg(v) = ∆ = ∆(ϕ2 ) in ϕ2 . If
v is an ordinary vertex, then Steps (i)–(vi) do not change v, and in Step (vi) a Stretch(v, .) operation
replaces v with two vertices v1 and v2 , where deg(v1 )+deg(v2 ) = ∆+2, and min{deg(v1 ), deg(v2 )} ≥
3. In this case, D(Φ, v) = (deg(v1 ) − 3) + (deg(v2 ) − 3) − (∆ − 3) = −1, and D(N, v) = 1. If v is a
virtual vertex, then deg(v) decreases in either Step (iv.b), (v.a) or (v.c). In Step (iv.b) or (v.a) one
Stretch(.) operation has the same effect on the potential as for ordinary vertices, D(Φ, v) = −1, but
it creates two new vertices, and so D(N, v) = 2. In Step (v.c), ∆−3 successive Stretch(.) operations
replace v with ∆ − 2 vertices of fixed orientation with degree 3. Thus, D(Φ, v) = 0 − (∆ − 2), and
D(N, v) ≤ ∆ − 3. In all cases, (2)–(3) follow.

Poles of p-paths. Let v be a pole of a p-path Gϕ2 (ν), with deg(u) = ∆ = ∆(ϕ2 ). Denote the
other pole of the p-path by u, where obviously deg(u) = deg(v) = ∆. If both u and v are ordinary,
then Steps (i)–(v) do not change Gϕ2 (ν). The Detach(.) operation in Step (vii) replaces v with ∆
new vertices of degree 1. Thus, D(Φ, v) = −(∆ − 2)2 and D(N, v) = ∆ − 1, thus (2)–(3) follow.
   Assume that u or v is a virtual vertex. Then a Contract(.) operation in Step (iv.a) eliminates
both u and v. We have D(Φ, u) = −(∆ − 2)2 and D(N, u) = −1.
   Step (iv.b) applies Stretch(.) to a pair of virtual vertices u1 and u2 of Gϕ (µ). Thus, we have
D(Φ, u1 ) = D(Φ, u2 ) < 0 and D(N, u1 ) = D(N, u2 ) = 1.

Proper cut vertices. Let v be a proper cut vertex in ϕ2 with deg(v) = ∆ = ∆(ϕ2 ) in some local
graph Gϕ2 (ν). Assume v has k ≥ 2 bridges B1 , . . . , Bk , and degBi (v) = di for all i ∈ [k]. Step (iii)
successively encloses the k bridges. Note that v remains a proper cut vertex of degreeP     ∆. Step (iii)
creates new virtual vertices v1 , . . . , vk in the p-star centered at v, where deg(v) = ki=1 deg(vi ).
Every new virtual vertex vi , i ∈ [k], is part of a proper 2-cut {v, vi }.
     Moreover, every virtual vertex vi , i ∈ [k], corresponds to another virtual vertex vi0 in the local
graph of an atom created by enclosing Bi ; this local graph is isomorphic to Bi , where vi0 plays the
role of v. In particular vi0 cannot be a cut vertex, but it may be contained in a proper 2-cut. At
the end of Step (iii), we obtain a ∆-nice instance ϕ3 in which none of the local graphs containing
a virtual vertex vi0 , i ∈ [k], is a p-path or a p-star contain any vertex of degree ∆. Therefore
Steps (iv)–(vii) do not change the degree of vi0 , and vi0 cannot become a cut vertex for any i ∈ [k].
     Next we consider the possible changes to the p-star centered at v in Steps (iv)–(vii). Step (iv.a)
may turn v into an ordinary vertex as noted above (but it changes neither D(Φ, v) nor D(N, v)).
Since v is a proper cut vertex of degree ∆, the next step that can possibly modify the p-star is
Step (v.b), (v.c), or (vii). In Step (v.b), a Contract(.) operation eliminates vertex v, and any vertex
vi , i ∈ [k] may become a cut vertex. In Step (v.c), successive Stretch(.) operations replace v with


                                                   28
∆ − 2 vertices of degree 3. Since each of these vertices could be a proper cut vertex, they contribute
(∆ − 2)(3 − 2)3 = ∆ − 2 to the potential. Finally, if v is an ordinary vertex, then Detach(v) in
Step (vii) replaces v with ∆ vertices of degree 1, which do not contribute to the potential.
   At the beginning of Step (iii), vertex v contributes (∆−2)3 to Φ(ϕ2 ). At the end of Subroutine 2,
the contribution of v, together with the virtual vertices vi and vi0 , over all i ∈ [k], is at most
                                            k
                                            X                        k
                                                                     X
                                (∆ − 2) +         (max{0, di })3 +     (max{0, di })2 .
                                            i=1                      i=1

By Lemma 18, D(Φ, v) ≤ −(∆ − 3) ≤ −∆/4.
   Let us estimate the number of new vertices created in these steps. In Step (iii), the Enclose(.)
operations create a pair of virtual vertices for each bridge of v (i.e., 2k vertices), and up to k
ordinary subdivision vertices. In Step (v.c), Stretch(.) operations create ∆ − 2 new vertices; and
in Step (vii), the Detach(v) operation increases the number of vertices by ∆ − 1. Therefore,
D(N, v) ≤ 3k + 2∆ − 3 ≤ 5∆ − 3. Since D(Φ, v) ≤ −∆/4, inequalities (2) and (3) follow.

Lemma 20. For an instance ϕ0 of atomic embeddability of size n, Algorithm terminates, it per-
forms O(N≥3 (ϕ0 ) + Φ(ϕ0 )) operations, and runs in O(n8 ) time.5

Proof. Consider one iteration of the while loop of Step (I), which calls Subroutines 1 and 2. By
Corollary 3, Step (i) terminates, performs O(Φ(ϕ0 ) − Φ(ϕ1 )) operations, and returns and instance
ϕ1 with and N (ϕ1 ) ≤ N (ϕ0 ) + 12(Φ(ϕ0 ) − Φ(ϕ1 )). By Lemma 17, Step (ii) terminates, performs
O(N≥3 (ϕ0 )) operations, and returns an instance ϕ2 with N≥3 (ϕ2 ) = N≥3 (ϕ1 ) and Φ(ϕ2 ) = Φ(ϕ1 ).
Similarly, by Lemma 19, the sequence of Steps (iii)–(vii) terminates, performs O(Φ(ϕ2 ) − Φ(ϕ7 ))
operations, and returns an instance ϕ7 with N (ϕ7 ) ≤ N (ϕ2 ) + O(Φ(ϕ2 ) − Φ(ϕ7 )).
   Using the definition of the potential, we can bound its initial value by
                         X
              Φ(ϕ0 ) =       (max{0, deg(v) − ξ(v)})σ(v) ≤ n · (∆(ϕ0 ) − 2)3 ≤ O(n4 ).
                            v∈V (G0 )

The while loop in Step (I) of the Algorithm terminates after ∆(ϕ0 ) − 3 ≤ n iterations, since each
iteration decreases ∆(.) by Lemmas 12 and 14. In each iteration, the potential Φ(.) decreases, and
N (.) increases by at most constant times the decrease of the potential by Lemmas 16, 17 and 19.
In particular, for every instance ϕ∗ in intermediate phases of Step (I), both N (ϕ∗ ) and N≥3 (ϕ∗ )
are bounded by O(n + Φ(ϕ0 )) ≤ O(n4 ).
    Each operation in Steps (i)–(vii) can be implemented in O(N (ϕ∗ )) time, where ϕ∗ is the instance
for which the operation is applied (this allows for planarity testing, and recomputing block trees
and SPQR-trees after each operation). As noted above, we have N (ϕ∗ ) ≤ O(n + Φ(ϕ0 )) ≤ O(n4 ).
The overall running time of all invocations of Step (i)–(vii) is O(n4 (n + Φ(ϕ0 ))) ≤ O(n8 ).
    By Lemmas 9 and 11, Steps (II)–(III) of the Algorithm run in O(N (ϕ7 )) ≤ O(n + Φ(ϕ0 )) ≤
O(n4 ) time.

Theorem 1. There is an algorithm that determines whether a simplicial map ϕ : G → H is atomic
embeddable in time polynomial in the number of edges and vertices in G and H.
  5
      Optimizing the running time analysis further, which we believe is possible, is beyond the scope of this work.




                                                          29
                  −1          0         1




Figure 13: The complete bipartite graph K3,4 (left) and its toroidal embeddings (middle and right)
in which 4 cubic vertices do not have the same rotation. The torus is obtained by identifying the
pairs of opposite sides of the square as indicated by arrows.


Proof. Let ϕ be an instance ϕ of atomic embeddability of size n, where n is the number of edges
and vertices in G and H. The Preprocessing algorithm runs in O(n) time and returns an equivalent
normal instance ϕ0 of size O(n) by Lemma 3. The main Algorithm for ϕ0 terminates in O(n8 )
time by Lemma 20, and determines whether ϕ0 is atomic embeddable by Lemma 15. Since ϕ0 and
ϕ are equivalent, this also determines whether ϕ is atomic embeddable.


3    Beyond Atomic Embeddings
Since atomic embeddability is tractable, it makes sense to consider its generalizations in which
every atom can have genus higher than 0.
    We consider the generalized atomic embedding problem for a simplical map ϕ : G → H,
where G and H are multigraphs without loops. The only difference from atomic embeddibility
is that we define the surface H as follows: For each atom ν ∈ V (H), we construct S(ν) from an
oriented surface of genus g(ν) without boundary (rather than a 2-sphere), and remove deg(ν) holes.
Hence, an instance for generalized atomic embeddability is a pair (ϕ, g), where ϕ is a simplicial
map ϕ : G → H and g : V (H) → N0 .

Problem 4 (Generalized atomic embeddability). Given a simplicial map ϕ : G → H, where
G and H are multigraphs without loops, and a function g : V (H) → N0 , decide whether a generalized
atomic embedding of G with respect to ϕ exists.

    In this section, we show that generalized atomic embeddability is NP-hard, and therefore
also NP-complete, even when g(ν) ≤ 1 for all atoms ν ∈ V (H), and the number of vertices in
ϕ−1 [ν] is at most 7 for each atom ν with g(ν) = 1.
    The NP-hardness proof is based on the embeddings of K3,4 on a torus. For an embedding of
K3,4 on a torus, we say that two vertices u and v of the same vertex class (i.e., with the same
degree) have the same rotation if the rotation of u is (uv1 , . . . , uvk ) and the rotation at v is
(vv1 , . . . , vvk ), where {v1 , . . . , vk } is a vertex class of K3,4 .

Lemma 21. In every embedding of K3,4 on the torus the four cubic vertices do not all have the
same rotation; subject to the previous claim, any rotations for the four cubic vertices can be realized
by a toroidal embedding.

Proof. The first author and Kynčl [23, Theorem 7(b)] recently proved that in every embedding of
K3,4 on the torus there exist two cubic vertices that do not have the same rotation.


                                                  30
                                                                 CPa




                                            a
                                           CN




Figure 14: The variable gadget Ga0 = C a P1 for the NP-hardness reduction of Not-All-Equal
3SAT to Generalized atomic embeddability.


   It remains to prove that in the following two cases there exists an embedding of K3,4 on the
torus. In one case, exactly 2 of the 4 cubic vertices have the same rotation; and in the other case,
exactly 3 of the 4 cubic vertices have the same rotation. Desired toroidal embeddings are given in
Fig. 13(middle) and (right).

Theorem 2. Generalized Atomic Embeddability is NP-hard.
Proof. We reduce Generalized Atomic Embeddability from Not-All-Equal 3SAT, which
is known to be NP-complete. An instance of Not-All-Equal 3SAT is given by a pair (A, C),
where A is a finite set of boolean variables and C is a finite set of clauses, each of which is a
conjunction of three literals. Each literal is either a variable a ∈ A or the negation of a, denoted
by ¬a. An instance (A, C) is positive if there exists an assignment τ : A → {true, false} such
that at least 1 and at most 2 literals are true in every clause.
    Given an instance (A, C) of Not-All-Equal 3SAT, we construct an instance (ϕ, g) for Gen-
eralized atomic embeddability, and show that it is positive if and only if (A, C) is positive.
Let C = {C1 , . . . , Cn }.
    We construct an instance (ϕ, g), where ϕ : G → H, g : V (H) → N0 . Let the multigraph H be
a p-star with a center ν0 , and n additional atoms ν1 , . . . , νn , such that there are 6 pipes between
ν0 and each νi , for i = 1, . . . , n. In particular, all pipes are incident to the center ν0 .
    We put g(ν0 ) = 0 and g(ν1 ) = . . . = g(νn ) = 1. We describe ϕ via a construction of local
graphs G0 = Gϕ (ν0 ), G1 = Gϕ (ν1 ), . . ., Gn = Gϕ (νn ). For ease of presentation, we describe the
local graphs as semi-directed graphs (in which some edges are directed and others are undirected).
However, in the eventual instance (ϕ, g), all local graphs are undirected (by replacing every directed
edge with an undirected edge.)
    The local graphs G1 , . . . , Gn are each isomorphic to K3,4 . Let G0 be a disjoint union of the
semi-directed graphs Ga0 = C a P1 , for all a ∈ A, where P1 is a path of length 1 and C a is a directed
cycle whose length is equal to four times the number of occurrences of a in the clauses in C. Let CPa
and CN  a denote the two vertex disjoint directed induced cycles in Ga of length equal to the length
                                                                             0
of C a , whose orientation is inherited from C a ; see Fig. 14 for an illustration.
    Next, we define the pipes in E(H) by designating the pairs of corresponding virtual vertices in
the local graphs; furthermore, for if a pipe ρ ∈ E(H) corresponds to virtual vertices u and v in two
local graphs, we also specify a bijection between the set of edges incident to u and the set of edges

                                                  31
incident to v. All vertices in local graphs that are not designated to be virtual will be ordinary.
This uniquely determines the instance (ϕ, g).
    For each clause Ci ∈ C, i ∈ [n], we define three pipes in E(H). Assume that Ci = (`1 ∨ `2 ∨ `3 ).
Recall that Gi is isomorphic to K3,4 . Label the three vertices of degree 4 in Gi by −1, 0, and 1
resp.; two arbitrary cubic vertices by the literal `1 ; and the remaining two cubic vertices by the
literals `2 and `3 , respectively. Let every cubic vertex v ∈ V (Gi ) be virtual, and let each vertex
with label ` ∈ {`1 , `2 , `3 } correspond a vertex u in CPa if ` = a and a vertex u in CN   a if ` = ¬a. We

construct the bijection between the edges incident to v and the edges incident to u as follows: Let
the edge between v and the vertex of Gi with label −1, 0, and 1, resp., correspond to the incoming,
undirected, and outgoing edge incident to v 0 in G0 . This completes the definition of the instance
(ϕ, g)
    It remains to prove that (ϕ, g) is a positive instance if and only if (A, C) is a positive instance.
Assume that (ϕ, g) is a positive instance of Generalized atomic embeddibility. Let E : G → H
be a generalized atomic embedding of G with respect to (ϕ, g). Since g(ν0 ) = 0, the restriction of
E on S(ν0 ) yields an embedding of G0 in the plane; and an embedding of Gi in the torus for all
i ∈ [n]. We construct a satisfying assignment τ : A → {true, false} based on the embedding of
G0 as follows. We put τ (a) = true if the incoming, undirected, and outgoing edges incident to a
vertex v in CPa appear in this counterclockwise order in the rotation of v in the embedding of G0 ;
and we put τ (a) = false otherwise. Note that the truth value of a is independent of the choice of
v. Also note that a literal ` of the clause Ci , i ∈ [n], is satisfied if and only if the edges between the
vertex v labeled by ` and the vertices labeled by −1, 0 and 1 in Gi appear in this clockwise order
in the rotation at v in the embedding of Gi . Note that Observation 1 holds also for generalized
atomic embeddability. By Lemma 21 and Observation 1, every clause Ci must be satisfied by at
least 1 and at most 2 literals, and hence, (A, C) is positive.
    Now assume that (A, C) is a positive instance of Not-All-Equal 3SAT. We can easily reverse
the argument in the previous paragraph as follows. Let τ be a satisfying assignment witnessing
that the instance is positive. We define a toroidal embedding of Gi , for all i ∈ [n], as follows. For
every literal `, the edges between a vertex v labeled by ` and the vertices labeled by −1, 0, and 1
in Gi appear in this clockwise order in the rotation of v in the embedding of Gi if and only if ` is
satisfied by τ . Lemma 21 and Observation 1 imply that we can construct the desired embeddings
of G1 , . . . , Gn on tori. This also determines a desired spherical embedding of G0 , which concludes
the proof.


4    Thickenability and Connected SEFE-2
In this section, we give a polynomial-time reduction of atomic embeddability (Problem 3),
as well as Connected sefe-2 (defined below) to thickenability (Problem 2). Recall that an
instance of atomic embeddability is given by a simplicial map ϕ : G → H. The instance is
positive if its output answer is True.

Thickenability. In the following, we express thickenability as a combinatorial problem, of
which atomic embaddability is a proper generalization, and then reduce atomic embaddabil-
ity to this problem.
    Let P = (H, F ) denote a 2-polyhedron, where the multigraph H is the 1-skeleton of P , and F
is the set of facets in P , each represented by a cycle in H. Let F = {f1 , . . . , f|F | }. A 2-polyhedron


                                                    32
P embeds in an orientable 3-manifold M (such as R3 ) if the following holds. The multigraph H
embeds in M so that the facets f1 , . . . , f|T | are mapped into pairwise interior disjoint topological
discs D1 , . . . , D|T | , resp., in M such that for every i ∈ [|F |] the boundary of Di , denoted by ∂Di ,
consists of the embedded cycle fi . The representation of P in M given by the discs D1 , . . . , D|F | is
an embedding of P . The restriction of the embedding of P to the boundaries of these discs gives
the embedding of H.
    For every v ∈ V (H), the link of v in P is a multigraph LP (v) = (E(v), F (v)), where the vertex
set E(v) is the multiset of edges in H incident to v, and the multiset of edges F (v) is in a bijection
with the set of facets in P that are incident to v and we give it next. Every pair {e, g} ⊂ E(v)
corresponds to an edge in F (v) whose multiplicity equals the number of facets in F that contain
both e and g.
    If P = (H, F ) is thickenable, then the intersection of its embedding in a manifold with a suffi-
ciently small 2-sphere centered at (the embedding of) a vertex v ∈ V (H) is a spherical embedding of
the link LP (v). Indeed, the 2-sphere intersects edges of H incident to v in points, and it intersects
facets in F incident to v in Jordan arcs between these points.
    Given a polyhedron P = (H, F ), the family {Ev : v ∈ V (H)}, where Ev is a planar (spherical)
embedding of LP (v), is compatible if, for every e ∈ E(H) joining vertices u and v, the rotation
at e in Eu is opposite to the rotation of e in Ev . The observation in the previous paragraph proves
the “only if” part of the following theorem.

Theorem 3 (Neuwirth [39]). The 2-dimensional polyhedron P = (H, F ) is thickenable if and only
if there exists a family of compatible embeddings of the vertex links of H.

   We show that testing the condition of Theorem 3 generalizes atomic embeddability and
connected sefe-2.

Reduction. For a given instance ϕ : G → H of atomic embeddibility, we define a 2-
dimensional polyhedron P (ϕ), and then show that P (ϕ) is thickenable if and only if ϕ is a positive
instance of atomic embeddibility. Let P (ϕ) = ( b    H, F ) denote the 2-dimensional polyhedron,
where H and F are defined as follows.
       b
    Roughly speaking, H   b is obtained by doubling the multigraph H and connecting each pair
of corresponding vertices in the two copies of H by new multiple edges, where every such edge
corresponds to a vertex of G. Hence, the vertex set V (H)
                                                       b of H b is {(µ, 0), (µ, 1) : µ ∈ V (H)}, and
we define its edge set as

                  H) ={ρu = (µ, 0)(µ, 1) : µ = ϕ(u) for some u ∈ V (G)}∪
                E( b
                        ∪{(ρ, 0) = (µ, 0)(ν, 0), (ρ, 1) = (µ, 1)(ν, 1) : ρ = νµ ∈ E(H)}.

The facets in F are in bijection with the edges in E(G). Formally,

   F ={(ρu = (µ, 0)(µ, 1), ρv = (µ, 1)(µ, 0)) : uv ∈ E(G) such that ϕ(u) = µ = ϕ(v)}∪
     ∪{((ρ, 0), ρu , (ρ, 1), ρv ) : uv ∈ E(G) such that ϕ(u) = µ, ϕ(v) = ν, µ 6= ν, and ρ = ϕ(uv)}.

Thus, for every edge of uv ∈ E(G), if ϕ maps the vertices u and v to the same atom (resp., different
atoms) of H, then the edge uv corresponds to a facet of P bounded by 2 (resp., 4) edges.
   It remains to prove that the polyhedron P (ϕ) has the desired property.


                                                    33
Lemma 22. For every instance ϕ : G → H of atomic embeddability, the 2-dimensional
polyhedron P (ϕ) is thickenable if and only if ϕ is a positive instance.
Proof. In order to prove the “only if” part, we assume that the polyhedron P = P (ϕ) = ( b                  H, F )
is thickenable. By Theorem 3, there exists a family of compatible spherical embeddings {Ev : v ∈
V(bH)} of the links {Lv (P ) : v ∈ V ( b           H)}. Let {Sv : v ∈ V ( b H)} be a family of pairwise disjoint
2-spheres, and let Ev : Lv (P ) → Sv be compatible embeddings for all v ∈ V (H).              b We construct an
atomic embedding of G on H with respect to ϕ in two steps as follows.
    First, for every (µ, 0) ∈ V ( b      H), we drill a small hole on S(µ,0) around (the embeedding of) every
vertex of L(µ,0) of the form (µ, 0)(ν, 0). Note that for every such vertex of V ( b       H), we have µν ∈ E(H)
by construction. Let f1 , . . . , fdeg((ρ,0)) denote the edges that are incident to (ρ, 0) = (µ, 0)(ν, 0) in
L(µ,0) (P ), for some νµ = ρ ∈ E(H). Formally, we remove from the 2-sphere S(µ,0) a small open
disc D(µ,0) ((ρ, 0)), thereby shortening edges f1 , . . . , fdeg((ρ,0)) incident to (ρ, 0) in E(µ,0) into Jordan
arcs a(ρ,0) (f1 ), . . . , a(ρ,0) (fdeg((ρ,0)) ), resp., ending on ∂D(µ,0) ((ρ, 0)), which is the boundary of the
closure of D(µ,0) ((ρ, 0)). Let S(µ,0)     0      denote the resulting 2-sphere with the removed disc(s) for all
(µ, 0) ∈ V (H).b
    Second, for every edge ρ = µν, we identify the curves ∂D(µ,0) ((ρ, 0)) with ∂D(ν,0) ((ρ, 0)) via
a homeomorphism that identifies the endpoints of a(ρ,0) (f ) and a(ρ,0)) (f ) for every f 3 (ρ, 0). A
desired homeomorphism exists since the embeddings E(µ,0) are compatible. Let H denote the surface
obtained by the previous identifications, where each S(µ,0) is interpreted at Sµ . Note that we have
just constructed a desired atomic embedding. Indeed, a vertex u ∈ V (G) is embedded by E(ϕ(u),0)
             0
as ρu on S(ϕ(u),0)     ; an edge uv ∈ E(G) where ϕ(u) = ϕ(v) is embedded by E(ϕ(v),0) as ρu ρv ; and an
edge uv ∈ E(G) where ϕ(u) 6= ϕ(v) is embedded as the union of a(ϕ(uv),0) (f ) on S(µ,0)          0            0
                                                                                                     and on S(ν,0) ,
where ϕ(uv) = νµ, and f corresponds to uv as described in the definition of F . This completes the
proof of the “only if” part.
    For the converse, assume that we are given an atomic embedding of G on H. Clearly, the
previous construction can be reversed to construct a subfamily of compatible spherical embeddings
E(µ,0) of the links L(µ,0) (P ), for all (µ, 0) ∈ V ( b     H). By taking the mirror image of this construction,
we obtain E(µ,1) , for all (µ, 1) ∈ V ( b        H). The union of E(µ,0) and E(µ,1) , for all µ ∈ V (H), gives the
desired family of compatible spherical embeddings. By Theorem 3, P (ϕ) is thickenable.

    An immediate consequence of Lemma 22 is the main result of this section.
Theorem 4. Atomic Embeddability reduces to thickenability in polynomial time.

Simultaneous embedding with fixed edges (SEFE-2). In the following we discuss an im-
plication of Theorem 4 to the problem of simultaneous embeddability of two graphs sefe-2, which
is formally described as follows.
Problem 5. sefe-2. Given two (planar) graphs, G1 = (V, E1 ) and G2 = (V, E2 ), decide whether
there exists a planar embedding E of G = G1 ∪ G2 such that both E[G1 ] and E[G2 ] are embeddings.
   The Connected sefe-2 is a special case of sefe-2 in which G1 ∩ G2 is connected. Angelini
and Da Lozzo [4] showed that connected sefe-2 is polynomial-time equivalent to c-planarity.
Since c-planarity is a special case of Atomic Embeddability, together with Theorem 4, this
immediately implies the following.
Corollary 5. Connected sefe-2 reduces in polynomial time to thickenability.

                                                        34
5    Acknowledgment
The first author would like to thank Arnaud de Mesmay for pointing him to Johannes Carmesin’s
work. Thanks are extended to Johannes Carmesin for kindly discussing this work with him, and
to Jan Kynčl for careful reading of the manuscript.


References
 [1] Hugo A. Akitaya, Greg Aloupis, Jeff Erickson, and Csaba D. Tóth. Recognizing weakly
     simple polygons. Discrete & Computational Geometry, 58(4):785–821, 2017. doi:10.1007/
     s00454-017-9918-3.
 [2] Hugo A. Akitaya, Radoslav Fulek, and Csaba D. Tóth. Recognizing weak embeddings of
     graphs. ACM Trans. Algorithms, 15(4):50:1–50:27, 2019. doi:10.1145/3344549.
 [3] Patrizio Angelini, Giuseppe Di Battista, Fabrizio Frati, Maurizio Patrignani, and Ignaz Rutter.
     Testing the simultaneous embeddability of two graphs whose intersection is a biconnected or
     a connected graph. J. Discrete Algorithms, 14:150–172, 2012. doi:doi.org/10.1016/j.jda.
     2011.12.015.
 [4] Patrizio Angelini and Giordano Da Lozzo. SEFE = C-Planarity? Comput. J., 59(12):1831–
     1838, 2016. doi:10.1093/comjnl/bxw035.
 [5] Patrizio Angelini and Giordano Da Lozzo. Clustered planarity with pipes. Algorithmica,
     81(6):2484–2526, 2019. doi:10.1007/s00453-018-00541-w.
 [6] S. B. Belyi. Self-nonintersecting and non intersecting chains. Mathematical notes of the
     Academy of Sciences of the USSR, 34(4):802–804, 1983. Translated from Matematicheskie
     Zametki, 34(4):625–628, 1983. doi:10.1007/BF01157400.
 [7] Thomas Bläsius, Annette Karrer, and Ignaz Rutter. Simultaneous embedding: Edge or-
     derings, relative positions, cutvertices. Algorithmica, 80(4):1214–1277, 2018. doi:10.1007/
     s00453-017-0301-9.
 [8] Thomas Bläsius, Stephen G. Kobourov, and Ignaz Rutter. Simultaneous embedding of planar
     graphs. In Roberto Tamassia, editor, Handbook of Graph Drawing and Visualization. Chapman
     and Hall/CRC, 2013.
 [9] Thomas Bläsius and Ignaz Rutter. Simultaneous PQ-ordering with applications to constrained
     embedding problems. ACM Trans. Algorithms, 12(2):article 16, 2016. doi:10.1145/2738054.
[10] Peter Brass, Eowyn Cenek, Cristian A. Duncan, Alon Efrat, Cesim Erten, Dan P. Ismailescu,
     Stephen G. Kobourov, Anna Lubiw, and Joseph S.B. Mitchell. On simultaneous planar
     graph embeddings. Computational Geometry, 36(2):117–130, 2007. doi:doi.org/10.1016/
     j.comgeo.2006.05.006.
[11] Benjamin A. Burton, Arnaud de Mesmay, and Uli Wagner. Embeddability of 2-complexes. In
     Benjamin Burton, Herbert Edelsbrunner, Jeff Erickson, and Stephan Tillmann, editors, Com-
     putational Geometric and Algebraic Topology, Oberwolfach Reports, chapter 45, pages 2666–
     2668. Mathematisches Forschungsinstitut Oberwolfach, 2015. doi:10.14760/OWR-2015-45.

                                                35
[12] Benjamin A Burton, Arnaud de Mesmay, and Uli Wagner. Finding non-orientable surfaces
     in 3-manifolds. Discrete & Computational Geometry, 58(4):871–888, 2017. doi:10.1007/
     s00454-017-9900-0.
[13] Johannes Carmesin. Embedding simply connected 2-complexes in 3-space – II. rotation sys-
     tems. Preprint, arXiv:1709.04643, 2017.
[14] Johannes Carmesin. Embedding simply connected 2-complexes in 3-space – V. A refined
     Kuratowski-type characterisation. Preprint, arXiv:1709.04659, 2017.
[15] Hsien-Chih Chang, Jeff Erickson, and Chao Xu. Detecting weakly simple polygons. In Proc.
     26th ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pages 1655–1670, 2015. doi:
     10.1137/1.9781611973730.110.
[16] Pier Francesco Cortese and Giuseppe Di Battista. Clustered planarity (invited lecture). In
     Proc. 21st Symposium on Computational Geometry (SoCG), pages 30–32. ACM Press, 2005.
     doi:10.1145/1064092.1064093.
[17] Pier Francesco Cortese, Giuseppe Di Battista, Fabrizio Frati, Maurizio Patrignani, and Mau-
     rizio Pizzonia. C-planarity of c-connected clustered graphs. J. Graph Algorithms Appl.,
     12(2):225–262, 2008. doi:10.7155/jgaa.00165.
[18] Pier Francesco Cortese, Giuseppe Di Battista, Maurizio Patrignani, and Maurizio Pizzonia.
     On embedding a cycle in a plane graph. Discrete Mathematics, 309(7):1856–1869, 2009. doi:
     10.1016/j.disc.2007.12.090.
[19] Arnaud de Mesmay, Yo’av Rieck, Eric Sedgwick, and Martin Tancer. Embeddability in R3
     is NP-hard. In Proc. 29th ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA), pages
     1316–1329, 2018. doi:10.1137/1.9781611975031.86.
[20] Giuseppe Di Battista and Roberto Tamassia. Incremental planarity testing. In 30th IEEE
     Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 436–441, 1989. doi:10.
     1109/SFCS.1989.63515.
[21] Qing-Wen Feng, Robert F. Cohen, and Peter Eades. How to draw a planar clustered graph.
     In Proc. 1st Conference on Computing and Combinatorics (COCOON), volume 959 of LNCS,
     pages 21–30. Springer, 1995. doi:10.1007/BFb0030816.
[22] Qing-Wen Feng, Robert F. Cohen, and Peter Eades. Planarity for clustered graphs. In Proc.
     3rd European Symposium on Algorithms (ESA), volume 979 of LNCS, pages 213–226. Springer,
     1995. doi:https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-60313-1_145.
[23] Radoslav Fulek and Jan Kynčl. Counterexample to an extension of the Hanani–Tutte theorem
     on the surface of genus 4. Preprint, arXiv:1709.00508, 2017.
[24] Radoslav Fulek and Jan Kynčl. Hanani–Tutte for approximating maps of graphs. Preprint,
     arXiv:1705.05243, 2017.
[25] Radoslav Fulek and Jan Kynčl. Hanani–Tutte for approximating maps of graphs. In Proc.
     34th Symposium on Computational Geometry (SoCG), volume 99 of LIPIcs, pages 39:1–39:15.
     Schloss Dagstuhl, 2018. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.SoCG.2018.39.

                                              36
[26] Radoslav Fulek, Jan Kynčl, Igor Malinović, and Dömötör Pálvölgyi. Clustered planarity
     testing revisited. Electron. J. Combin., 22(4):article P4.24, 2015. URL: https://www.
     combinatorics.org/ojs/index.php/eljc/article/view/v22i4p24.

[27] Carsten Gutwenger, Michael Jünger, Sebastian Leipert, Petra Mutzel, Merijam Percan, and
     René Weiskircher. Advances in c-planarity testing of clustered graphs. In Proc. 10th Symposium
     on Graph Drawing, volume 2528 of LNCS, pages 220–236. Springer, 2002. doi:10.1007/
     3-540-36151-0_21.

[28] Bernhard Haeupler, Krishnam Raju Jampani, and Anna Lubiw. Testing simultaneous planarity
     when the common graph is 2-connected. J. Graph Algorithms Appl., 17(3):147–171, 2013.
     doi:10.7155/jgaa.00289.

[29] Allen Hatcher. Algebraic Topology. Cambridge University Press, 2005.

[30] John E. Hopcroft and Robert E. Tarjan. Efficient planarity testing. J. ACM, 21(4):549–568,
     1974. doi:10.1145/321850.321852.

[31] Thomas Lengauer. Hierarchical planarity testing algorithms. J. ACM, 36(3):474–509, 1989.
     doi:10.1145/65950.65952.

[32] Saunders Mac Lane. A structural characterization of planar combinatorial graphs. Duke Math.
     J., 3(3):460–472, 1937. doi:10.1215/S0012-7094-37-00336-3.

[33] Jiřı́ Matoušek, Eric Sedgwick, Martin Tancer, and Uli Wagner. Embeddability in the 3-sphere
     is decidable. J. ACM, 65(1):5:1–5:49, 2018. doi:10.1145/3078632.

[34] William H. Meeks and Julie Patrusky. Representing homology classes by embedded circles on
     a compact surface. Illinois Journal of Mathematics, 22(2):262–269, 1978. doi:10.1215/ijm/
     1256048735.

[35] Arnaud De Mesmay, Vojtěch Kaluža, and Martin Tancer, 2019. Personal communication.

[36] Mark D. Meyerson. Representing homology classes of closed orientable surfaces. Pro-
     ceedings of the American Mathematical Society, 61(1):181–182, 1976.   doi:10.1090/
     S0002-9939-1976-0425967-3.

[37] Piotr Minc. On simplicial maps and chainable continua. Topology and its Applications, 57(1):1–
     21, 1994. doi:10.1016/0166-8641(94)90028-0.

[38] John Morgan and Gang Tian. Ricci Flow and the Poincaré Conjecture, volume 3 of Clay Math-
     ematics Monographs. AMS, Providence, 2007. URL: https://books.google.com/books?id=
     8FctN7U85-QC.

[39] Lee Neuwirth. An algorithm for the construction of 3-manifolds from 2-complexes. Math-
     ematical Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society, 64(3), 1968. doi:10.1017/
     S0305004100043279.

[40] Grisha Perelman. The entropy formula for the Ricci flow and its geometric applications.
     Preprint, arXiv:math/0211159, 2002.


                                                37
[41] Grisha Perelman. Finite extinction time for the solutions to the Ricci flow on certain three-
     manifolds. Preprint, arXiv:math/0307245, 2003.

[42] Grisha Perelman. Ricci flow with surgery on three-manifolds. Preprint, arXiv:math/0303109,
     2003.

[43] Dušan Repovš and Arkadij B. Skopenkov. A deleted product criterion for approximability
     of maps by embeddings. Topology Appl., 87(1):1–19, 1998. doi:10.1016/S0166-8641(97)
     00121-1.

[44] Marcus Schaefer. Toward a theory of planarity: Hanani-Tutte and planarity variants. J. Graph
     Algorithms Appl., 17(4):367–440, 2013. doi:10.7155/jgaa.00298.

[45] Karol Sieklucki. Realization of mappings. Fundamenta Mathematicae, 65(3):325–343, 1969.
     doi:10.4064/fm-65-3-325-343.

[46] Arkadiy B. Skopenkov. A generalization of Neuwirth’s theorem on thickening 2-dimensional
     polyhedra. Mathematical Notes, 58(5):1244–1247, 1995. doi:10.1007/BF02305012.

[47] Mikhail Skopenkov. On approximability by embeddings of cycles in the plane. Topology Appl.,
     134(1):1–22, 2003. doi:10.1016/S0166-8641(03)00069-5.

[48] John Stillwell. Classical Topology and Combinatorial Group Theory, volume 72 of Graduate
     Texts in Mathematics. Springer, New York, 1993. doi:10.1007/978-1-4612-4372-4.




                                               38
